**[PUBLISHED ONLINE: 29 JUNE 2015 | DOI: 10.1038/NMAT4336](http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nmat4336)**

# In situ study of the initiation of hydrogen bubbles at the aluminium metal/oxide interface

**De-Gang Xie[1], Zhang-Jie Wang[1], Jun Sun[1], Ju Li[1,2,3]*, Evan Ma[1,4]* and Zhi-Wei Shan[1]***


**The presence of excess hydrogen at the interface between a**
**metal substrate and a protective oxide can cause blistering[1–3]**
**and spallation of the scale[4–8]. However, it remains unclear**
**how nanoscale bubbles manage to reach the critical size in**
**the first place. Here, we perform in situ environmental trans-**
**mission electron microscopy experiments of the aluminium**
**metal/oxide interface under hydrogen exposure. It is found**
**that once the interface is weakened by hydrogen segregation,**
**surface difusion of Al atoms initiates the formation of faceted**
**cavities on the metal side, driven by Wulf reconstruction.**
**The morphology and growth rate of these cavities are highly**
**sensitive to the crystallographic orientation of the aluminium**
**substrate. Once the cavities grow to a critical size, the internal**
**gaspressurecanbecomegreatenoughtoblistertheoxidelayer.**
**Our findings have implications for understanding hydrogen**
**damage of interfaces.**
Hydrogen-induced interfacial failure, such as blistering at the
metal (M)/oxide (MO) interface and protective scale spallation, is
well known to plague native oxides and coatings on metals and
alloys. In gas turbines[3,6–8], nuclear power plants[9–11], humid environments[1,12], or even solar sails[13], such hydrogen-related damage can
be severe. It is generally believed that gross interfacial failure begins
by the growth of a nanoscale gas bubble[14,15], driven by the internal
gas pressure P, that plastically deforms the capping oxide layer to
cause a visible outward blister (with radius of curvature, R). Existing
models[14,16–18] pitch P against the yield strength σY, of the MO layer,
and its surface energy γ . One can then derive a critical blister radius
_RC that depends on P, with the following relationship defining when_
blistering can occur:

_P −_ [4]3[σ]R[Y][2]C[t][ 2] − [2]R[γ]C _>_ 0 (1)

where t is the MO layer thickness. However, after inserting reasonable material parameters into equation (1) (see Supplementary
Information) for Al/Al2O3, the following problem is noted. For P
values of a few hundred megapascals (same order as the bulk yield
strength of Al), RC is of the order of tens of nanometres. But if so, how
does a ‘subcritical’ (R _<_ _RC) gas bubble grow? Calculations show that_
the thermal fluctuation energy kBT cannot propel R to RC within
the experimental timescale. If one uses an unrealistically high gas
pressure P of tens of gigapascals (even higher than the ideal strength
of Al), RC can still only be reduced to a few nanometres. In other
words, existing theories, although explaining MO blistering at above
tens of nanometres, seem to leave a gap below tens of nanometres,
where M deformation seems inevitable.


This gap in understanding can be filled by recognizing that
the metal surface morphology can change in the presence of free
surface diffusion, which has been recently shown to be an important
deformation mechanism of metals at sub-10-nm scale even at room
temperature[19,20]. This speculation is strengthened by the realization
that the metal configuration near M/MO is likely to be a metastable,
kinetically trapped structure, usually not optimal for M itself in
terms of its surface energies. However, if hydrogen atoms segregate
to the M/MO interface and sever M–O bonds[21–23], the M atoms
freed from MO can diffuse more quickly towards the desired shape,
dictated by M’s Wulff construction, at least at the nanoscale. This
provides an additional thermodynamic driving force unaccounted
for in equation (1), which is concerned with only oxide properties,
as well as a kinetic pathway to achieve RC because metal surface
diffusion is very efficacious at changing morphology at small length
scales (rate ∝ _r_ [−][3]; ref. 20). The postulated pathway is illustrated in
Fig. 1. When an interface is weakened by the interface-segregating
hydrogen atoms (Fig. 1a), surface diffusion of metal atoms becomes
readily activated, to reshape the metal surface: the M atoms
diffuse away along the M/MO interface to evolve the exposed M
surface towards that predicted by the Wulff construction. Once the
inwardly growing cavity (Fig. 1b) reaches a critical size, the trapped
gas pressure will be sufficient to mechanically push the oxide layer
outward. This permits the ensuing oxide blistering (Fig. 1c) that
expands outward, causing eventual oxide spallation.
To directly observe how the cavity emerges initially underneath
the oxide layer, here we have monitored the hydrogenation process
of single-crystalline aluminium pillars with a thin layer of native
oxide, in a 2 Pa H2 gas environment at room temperature, inside an
environmental transmission electron microscope (TEM). Figure 2
shows the bright-field TEM images of a pillar 240 nm in diameter,
before and after hydrogen exposure. Two main changes can be
clearly observed after exposure to hydrogen: the originally smooth
thickness contours and metal/oxide interface have become wavy;
blisters form at geometrical edges (red arrows in Fig. 2b). For
comparison, in situ TEM experiments were also conducted in
vacuum and with a pure nitrogen gas environment, which showed
no such changes in the pillar under similar electron-beam intensity
and exposure time, indicating that hydrogen exposure is responsible
for the observed blistering and roughening. The main effect of the
electron beam in our experiments is to ionize the H2, generating
high fugacity to facilitate hydrogen entrance[17].
Figure 3 reveals how the cavities nucleate at the metal/oxide interface. As seen in Fig. 3a, the initial interface is straight and smooth,
and so are the thickness contours inside the pillar. As exposure to


1Center for Advancing Materials Performance from the Nanoscale (CAMP-Nano) & Hysitron Applied Research Center in China (HARCC), State Key
Laboratory for Mechanical Behavior of Materials, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an 710049, China. [2]Department of Nuclear Science and Engineering,
Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, USA. [3]Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge,
Massachusetts 02139, USA. [4]Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland 21218, USA.


-----

Metal oxide (MO)

H H H

Metal (M)


**b** _R_

M

Low-energy facets


**c**

H2

_wc_


**Figure 1 | Schematic illustration of the development of a blister on a metal**
**surface. a, Hydrogen atoms segregated at the MO/M interface undermine**
the interfacial bonds. b, The metal locally reshapes itself by surface
difusion to approach the Wulf morphology, creating a cavity with
low-energy facets at the metal side. c, After the cavity reaches a critical size
_wc, the internal gas pressure becomes adequate to bend the MO layer_
outwards to form a dome-shaped blister of radius r.

hydrogen continues, small perturbations appear and grow to assume
well-shaped cavities, which bow towards the metal side (see Fig. 3b
and Supplementary Movie 1). The base widths w of these ‘wells’
range from a few nanometres to about 25 nm, and their spatial
arrangement shows some degree of periodicity along the interface.
The average cavity size characterized by ¯w increases with time, and
each individual cavity continuously changes its size and shape (see
Supplementary Movies 1 and 2). Also, we observed cavity coarsening; that is, big cavities consume the small ones (see Supplementary Fig. 1). This evolution of nanocavities changes the thickness
gradient in the near-interface region, giving rise to wavy thickness
contours. As dislocation activity is not observed, the formation of
the cavity at the oxide/metal interface is made possible by diffusional
deformation of the metal surface. The surface diffusion is facile,
because when hydrogen segregates at the interface, the interfacial
atomic bonds are much weakened owing to hydrogen insertion[21–23],
and the activation barrier for diffusion of the near-interface atoms
is lowered because they are no longer directly bonded to the oxide.
The metal surfaces are then able to locally approach the inclinations
dictated by the Wulff construction, due to capillary forces that drive
energy minimization. Consequently, {111} facets, which are known
to have the lowest surface energy in face-centred cubic metals, are
expected to develop. Indeed, as the cavities grow to about w = 20 nm
in size (defined by the largest geometric dimension), their profiles
show clear straight segments, which result from the projections of
{111} facets that comprise the inner cavity surface bordering the Al
underneath (Fig. 3c,d).
The above observations prove that low-gas-pressure cavity


Before hydrogen
exposure

2 Pa H2 + electron beam, 55 min


**Figure 2 | Sample morphology before and after hydrogen exposure. a, The**
Al pillar before hydrogen exposure exhibits smooth thickness contours.
**b, The same pillar after hydrogen and electron-beam exposure for 55 min**
grows out several large blisters, as marked with red arrows. The thickness
contours became wavy as well. The areas outlined by the orange and blue
dashed lines are shown in Figs 3 and 4, respectively. Both scale bars,
200 nm.

of metal-side Wulff reconstruction, and also enabled by facile
metal-side surface diffusion. In principle, as long as there is enough
hydrogen segregation to debond M–O at the M/MO interface—
a molecular (Ångström)-scale process that promotes freed-metal
surface diffusion—such pre-blister nanoscale cavities can form,
even with P → 0.
Figure 4 depicts a typical process of blister formation at an
edge of the pillar. After metal atoms diffuse away to leave a cavity,
the newly exposed metal surfaces develop crystallographic {111}
facets. Within 25 min of hydrogen exposure, the cavity w grows
bigger as the {111} facets retreat inward, but the oxide layer remains
unyielding (Fig. 4b). At 28 min, when the width of the cavity reaches
44 nm in diameter (Fig. 4c), the oxide begins to undergo large plastic
deformation under the pressure of the accumulated H2 gas, creating
a blister.
Obviously, the cavity has to reach a critical size (wc) before the
onset of plastic deformation of the oxide layer, because it acts as a
pinning constraint on the MO membrane. The initial stage of cavity
emergence described above (not due to high internal hydrogen
pressure) allows the deformation of the oxide layer to start from
a much larger size than those required by traditional pressuredriven models[14,16–18]. Therefore, the singularity problem in those
nucleation models is resolved. Also, this criterion underscores two
directions that may help suppress the unwanted blistering. The first
is to increase Rc by lowering the environmental hydrogen fugacity
(such as lowering the level of moisture). The second is to decrease


-----

slope of S. The surface diffusivity DS can then be estimated using
the following equation:


λ

2π




4



_DS_
=− _νγ[Sk] M[B]Ω[T]_ [2]


where kB is the Boltzmann constant, γM is surface energy of the metal
(γM(111) 980 mJ m[−][2]), Ω is atomic volume (0.0166 nm[3]/atom), T
is temperature (298 K), = _ν is the surface atomic density (ν(111)_
0.1 atom nm[−][2]), and λ is the segment length of the facet in the =
rest position (for example, λ = 50 nm for the blister in Fig. 4d).
The calculated DS for the two individual blisters (Fig. 4 and
Supplementary Fig. 2) is 2 × 10[−][11] cm[2] s[−][1] and 3 × 10[−][11] cm[2] s[−][1],
respectively. This is very close to the prediction from the
empirical rule[26,27],

6.54Tm
_DS =_ 0.014exp − _T_ cm[2] s[−][1]
 

where Tm is the melting temperature of Al (933 K). The calculated DS
is 1.8 10[−][11] cm[2] s[−][1] for Al (without Al2O3) at room temperature.
×
The pristine metal surfaces in our experiments are completely
immersed in hydrogen, akin to clean Al with near-intrinsic surface
diffusivity. We can therefore conclude that it is indeed the surface
diffusion of Al that opens up the initial cavity for the blisters to
take shape.
The degree of blistering we observed depends on surface
orientation. Figure 5 shows scanning electron microscopy (SEM)
images of a [110] (its axial direction) pillar, with Fig. 5a,b being
the side view and top view, respectively. The orientations of the
{111} planes (marked red) are shown in Fig. 5b. We observed that
around the pillar circumference the blisters preferentially reside
atop the {111} planes, whereas much smaller blisters are visible on
the {100} planes and no blisters are found on the {110} planes.
In comparison, Fig. 5c shows a pillar in the [100] axial direction,
which has no {111} planes on its cylindrical surface. As a result,
blisters form more randomly all over the cylindrical surface after
prolonged hydrogen exposure. These results (see more evidence
in Supplementary Fig. 3 and Supplementary Table 1) indicate
that the surface blistering propensity is orientation dependent
and follows the following ranking order: {111} > {100} > {110},


0 min

31 min

**d** BD = [110]

(111) (111)

[111] [111]


BD = [110]

[111] [111]


**Figure 3 | Cavity nucleation and growth below the metal/oxide interface.**
**a, Before exposure to hydrogen the initial interface is smooth. b, After**
31 min of hydrogen exposure, the interface developed a wavy morphology
(see Supplementary Movies 1 and 2). c, The grown cavities show clear {111}
facets. d, The selected area difraction pattern with the beam direction (BD)
along the [110] zone axis of the pillar. All scale bars, 20 nm.

reducing surface roughness, removing grain boundary/surface
intersections, and engineering the surface orientation; suppressing
surface diffusion, possibly by adding alloying elements into the
base metal.
The retreating {111} facet at the edge of the pillar also gives
us an opportunity to quantitatively estimate the surface diffusivity.
By drawing an analogy to the flattening of a wrinkled surface,
a quantitative model to estimate the surface diffusivity can be
obtained, following the method of refs 24,25. Assuming that the
corner is a single-hump wrinkle, we can adopt the final rest position
of the {111} facet in Fig. 4d as the reference and measure the height
change of the receding facet with time. As plotted in Fig. 4e, the
natural logarithm of height is a linear function of time, giving a


2.5

2.0

1.5

1.0


10

5.0


2.0

1.0


0.5

0.0

−0.5

−1.0


0 min


25 min

Interface at
0 min


0.5


|h λ ≈ 50 nm Slope (S) = −3.3 × 10−3 s−1|Col2|
|---|---|
|0 200 400 600 800 t (s)|1,0|


37 min

(111)

28 min

44 nm

**Figure 4 | Blister formation accompanying the receding faceted surface. a, The initial metal/oxide interface near an edge of the pillar; this reference profile**
of the interface is superimposed in b–d using a white dotted line. b, Cavity nucleation at the edge, with the metal surface retracted. Note that the oxide
layer remains un-deformed at this point in time. c, The oxide layer bulges outward as a result of H2 pressure. d, A ripened blister, with the oxide layer and
metal surface bulging outward and inward, respectively. The newly exposed metal surface shows clear {111} facets. (See Supplementary Movie 1.) e, The


-----

|Col1|35°|
|---|---|



[100]


{110}

{111}

35°

{100}

55°

[110]



[110]


**Figure 5 | Orientation-dependent blister distribution. a, Side-view SEM image of the pillar with the axis in the [110] direction after hydrogen exposure**
(∼2 Pa, 35 min). Two columns of large blisters line up on the front surface. Additionally, small blisters exist at sites marked with green arrows. b, Top-view
SEM image of the same pillar showing that four blister line-ups reside on the {111} surfaces, whereas small blisters reside on the {100} surfaces. c, Blisters
on a pillar with [100] axial direction after hydrogenation (2–4 Pa, 1.5 h). Owing to the absence of {111} planes parallel to the pillar axis, blisters spread more
randomly over the entire cylindrical surface. All scale bars, 200 nm.


in line with the expectation from their surface energies[28]. This
blistering anisotropy originates from the fact that {111} facets
have the lowest surface energy and are correspondingly the most
prone to cavity nucleation and growth. As already shown in Fig. 4,
the cavity on {111} has the fastest growth rate and reaches wc
the earliest. Figure 5 thus suggests that to delay blistering in the
surface oxide, the metal should avoid low-energy planes parallel to
its surfaces.
We have discovered that long before visible blisters are created,
cavities form beneath the oxide film on hydrogen exposure, driven
by Wulff reconstruction and freed-metal surface diffusion. We
name this phenomenon ‘pre-blister cavitation’, which occurs on the
metal side. Our findings suggest that it takes much less hydrogen
to weaken the interface to allow Wulff reconstruction than to
blister the oxide layer. This has implications for understanding the
integrity/damage of coatings and passivation films on metals, where
hydrogen-induced interfacial failure is a major threat. In particular,
even when the blisters stay subcritical (Fig. 1b) owing to very small
Wulff cavities (say ∼5 nm), these very small Wulff cavities are still
hidden damage that greatly reduces the interfacial delamination
strength, by providing potential nucleation and coalescence sites for
interfacial fracture under external stress. Therefore, blistering is a
final-stage visible symptom of hydrogen damage of the interface, but
not a necessary condition for markedly easier scale spallation from
the substrate[6,29].

**Methods**
[Methods and any associated references are available in the online](http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nmat4336)
[version of the paper.](http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nmat4336)

Received 5 February 2015; accepted 25 May 2015;
published online 29 June 2015

**References**
1. Rozenak, P. Hemispherical bubbles growth on electrochemically charged
aluminum with hydrogen. Int. J. Hydrog. Energy 32, 2816–2823 (2007).
2. Liu, Y. et al. Detachment of alumina films from aluminium by 100 keV H[+] ions.
_Surf. Interface Anal. 33, 318–321 (2002)._
3. Subanovic, M. et al. Blistering of MCrAlY-coatings in H2/H2O-atmospheres.
_Corros. Sci. 51, 446–450 (2009)._
4. Sergo, V. & Clarke, D. R. Observation of subcritical spall propagation of a
thermal barrier coating. J. Am. Ceram. Soc. 81, 3237–3242 (1998).
5. Saunders, S. R. J., Monteiro, M. & Rizzo, F. The oxidation behaviour of metals
and alloys at high temperatures in atmospheres containing water vapour: A


6. Smialek, J. L. Moisture-induced TBC spallation on turbine blade samples. Surf.
_Coat. Technol. 206, 1577–1585 (2011)._
7. Haynes, J. A., Unocic, K. A. & Pint, B. A. Effect of water vapor on the 1100 [◦]C
oxidation behavior of plasma-sprayed TBCs with HVOF NiCoCrAlX bond
coatings. Surf. Coat. Technol. 215, 39–45 (2013).
8. Hultquist, G., Tveten, B. & Hornlund, E. Hydrogen in chromium: Influence on
the high-temperature oxidation kinetics in H2O, oxide-growth mechanisms,
and scale adherence. Oxid. Met. 54, 1–10 (2000).
9. Bailey, P. et al. Damage of alumina films by medium energy hydrogen and
helium ions. Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. B 197, 265–270 (2002).
10. Tokunaga, K. et al. Blister formation and deuterium retention on tungsten
exposed to low energy and high flux deuterium plasma. J. Nucl. Mater. 337,
887–891 (2005).
11. Lu, G. H., Zhou, H. B. & Becquart, C. S. A review of modelling and simulation
of hydrogen behaviour in tungsten at different scales. Nucl. Fusion 54,
086001 (2014).
12. Scamans, G. M. & Rehal, A. S. Electron metallography of the aluminium-water
vapour reaction and its relevance to stress-corrosion susceptibility. J. Mater. Sci.
**14, 2459–2470 (1979).**
13. Sznajder, M. & Geppert, U. in Advances in Solar Sailing (ed. Macdonald, M.)
Ch. 35, 559–571 (Springer, 2014).
14. Condon, J. B. & Schober, T. Hydrogen bubbles in metals. J. Nucl. Mater. 207,
1–24 (1993).
15. Liu, Y. L. et al. Vacancy trapping mechanism for hydrogen bubble formation in
metal. Phys. Rev. B 79, 172103 (2009).
16. Flower, H. M. Electron-irradiation induced aqueous corrosion of aluminum
and magnesium. Radiat. Eff. Defects Solids 33, 173–179 (1977).
17. Bond, G. M., Robertson, I. M. & Birnbaum, H. K. On the determination of the
hydrogen fugacity in an environmental cell TEM facility. Scr. Metall. 20,
653–658 (1986).
18. Das, S. K. & Kaminsky, M. Radiation Effects on Solid Surfaces Vol. 158, Ch. 5,
112–170 (Advances in Chemistry, American Chemical Society, 1976).
19. Tian, L., Li, J., Sun, J., Ma, E. & Shan, Z. W. Visualizing size-dependent
deformation mechanism transition in Sn. Sci. Rep. 3, 2113 (2013).
20. Sun, J. et al. Liquid-like pseudoelasticity of sub-10-nm crystalline silver
particles. Nature Mater. 13, 1007–1012 (2014).
21. Oriani, R. A. & Josephic, P. H. Equilibrium aspects of hydrogen-induced
cracking of steels. Acta Metall. 22, 1065–1074 (1974).
22. Oriani, R. A. Hydrogen embrittlement of steels. Annu. Rev. Mater. Sci. 8,
327–357 (1978).
23. Daw, M. S. & Baskes, M. I. Semiempirical, quantum mechanical calculation of
hydrogen embrittlement in metals. Phys. Rev. Lett. 50, 1285–1288 (1983).
24. Mullins, W. W. Flattening of a nearly plane solid surface due to capillarity.
_J. Appl. Phys. 30, 77–83 (1959)._
25. Keeffe, M. E., Umbach, C. C. & Blakely, J. M. Surface self-diffusion on Si from
the evolution of periodic atomic step arrays. J. Phys. Chem. Solids 55,
965–973 (1994).
26. Tu, K. N. Solder Joint Technology Vol. 117, Ch. 8, 211–243 (Springer Series in
Materials Science, Springer, 2007).
27. Shewmon, P. Diffusion in Solids, Ch. 6, 189–222 (Minerals, Metals & Materials


-----

**Author contributions**
Z.-W.S., J.L. and E.M. conceived and designed the project. D.-G.X. conducted the
experimental work. D.-G.X., Z.-W.S., J.L. and E.M. wrote the paper. All authors
contributed to discussions of the results.

**Additional information**
[Supplementary information is available in the online version of the paper. Reprints and](http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nmat4336)
[permissions information is available online at www.nature.com/reprints.](http://www.nature.com/reprints)
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to J.L., E.M. or Z.-W.S.

**Competing financial interests**
The authors declare no competing financial interests.


28. Vitos, L., Ruban, A., Skriver, H. L. & Kollar, J. The surface energy of metals.
_Surf. Sci. 411, 186–202 (1998)._
29. Leyens, C., Fritscher, K., Gehrling, R., Peters, M. & Kaysser, W. A. Oxide scale
formation on an MCrAlY coating in various H2–H2O atmospheres. Surf. Coat.
_Technol. 82, 133–144 (1996)._

**Acknowledgements**
The authors acknowledge support from the Natural Science Foundation of China
(51231005, 11132006, 51401159 and 51321003), and 973 Programs of China
(2012CB619402). We also appreciate the support from the 111 project (B06025). J.L.
acknowledges support by NSF DMR-1120901 and DMR-1410636. E.M. acknowledges
support from US DoE-BES-DMSE, under Contract No. DE-FG02-09ER46056. We also
thank P. H. Lu and M. Li for assistance in EELS characterization and data processing.


-----

**Methods**
We prepared single-crystal cylindrical aluminium pillars using focused ion
beam (FIB) micromachining, such that various lattice planes in a chosen zone
axis could occupy their representative areas on the cylindrical surface. This
makes it convenient for investigating the effect of crystal orientation on the
blistering behaviour. Also, unlike the acute wedge shape of an electrochemically
polished sample, the cylindrical sample has a controllable surface curvature,
edge-on to the electron beam, and thus is more conducive to imaging and
visual observation.
Two types of cylindrical pillar, with an axial direction of either [110] or [100],
were fabricated. All pillars had top diameters ranging from 220 to 500 nm, with an


aspect ratio (height/diameter) between 2 and 3. To minimize the FIB damage, the
final milling current was lowered to 2.34 pA. The as-fabricated pillars had a surface
oxide layer (Supplementary Fig. 5) of about 5–9 nm in thickness.
The experiments were conducted in an environmental TEM (Hitachi H9500)
evacuated to a base vacuum of 10[−][4] Pa. Ultrahigh-purity H2 (99.999%) was
introduced through a needle valve into the specimen chamber. The pressure was
controlled in the range between 1 and 3 Pa, measured by a vacuum gauge near the
sample. The intensity of the electron beam illuminating the pillar was
0.2–5.0 nA µm[−][2], and the beam direction was close to the [110] direction of all
pillars. The cavity formation and blistering processes were monitored using a
Gatan 832 camera at 5 frames per second.


-----

