[DOI: 10.1002/pip.3250](https://doi.org/10.1002/pip.3250)

R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E

# Implantation-based passivating contacts for crystalline silicon front/rear contacted solar cells

**Gianluca Limodio** **|** **Guangtao Yang** **|** **Yvar De Groot** **|** **Paul Procel** **|**
**Luana Mazzarella** **|** **Arthur W. Weber** **|** **Olindo Isabella** **|** **Miro Zeman**


Photovoltaic Material and Devices Group,
Delft University of Technology, PO Box 5031,
2600, GA, Delft, The Netherlands

**Correspondence**
Gianluca Limodio, Photovoltaic Material and
Devices Group, Delft University of
Technology, PO Box 5031, 2600 GA Delft,
The Netherlands.
[Email: g.limodio@tudelft.nl](mailto:g.limodio@tudelft.nl)

**Funding information**
ADEM, Grant/Award Number: TUD - P18

**1** | **INTRODUCTION**


**Abstract**

In this work, we develop SiOx/poly-Si carrier-selective contacts grown by low
pressure chemical vapor deposition and boron or phosphorus doped by ion implanta
tion. We investigate their passivation properties on symmetric structures while

varying the thickness of poly-Si in a wide range (20-250 nm). Dose and energy of

implantation as well as temperature and time of annealing were optimized, achieving

implied open-circuit voltage well above 700 mV for electron-selective contacts

regardless the poly-Si layer thickness. In case of hole-selective contacts, the passiv
ation quality decreases by thinning the poly-Si layer. For both poly-Si doping types,

forming gas annealing helps to augment the passivation quality. The optimized doped

poly-Si layers are then implemented in c-Si solar cells featuring SiO2/poly-Si contacts

with different polarities on both front and rear sides in a lean manufacturing process

free from transparent conductive oxide (TCO). At cell level, open-circuit voltage

degrades when thinner p-type poly-Si layer is employed, while a consistent gain in

short circuit current is measured when front poly-Si thickness is thinned down from

250 to 35 nm (up to +4 mA/cm[2]). We circumvent this limitation by decoupling front

and rear layer thickness obtaining, on one hand, reasonably high current (JSC-EQE =

38.2 mA/cm[2]) and, on the other hand, relatively high VOC of approximately 690 mV.

The best TCO-free device using Ti-seeded Cu-plated front contact exhibits a fill

factor of 75.2% and conversion efficiency of 19.6%.

**K E Y W O R D S**

doping, ion implantation, passivating contacts, poly-silicon, silicon solar cells

carriers.[2] A first type of such carrier-selective passivating contact

(CSPC) employs a stack of intrinsic and doped hydrogenated amor

Very low surface recombination velocity at the c-Si/metal interface is

required to enhance the conversion efficiency of a c-Si solar cell.[1] This

task is successfully achieved by inserting a layer separating the c-Si

absorber from the metal contact, which properly passivates the c-Si

surface and, at the same time, selectively collects one type of


phous silicon (a-Si:H) grown on both sides of c-Si wafer, enabling

open-circuit voltages (VOCs) up to 750 mV.[3] Kaneka has recently

reported a conversion efficiency (η) above 25% for a front-/back
contacted (FBC) c-Si solar cell[4] and a world record efficiency of 26.7%

for an interdigitated back-contacted (IBC) architecture] [4,5]. However,


[This is an open access article under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which permits use, distribution and reproduction in any medium,](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/)
provided the original work is properly cited.
© 2020 The Authors. Progress in Photovoltaics: Research and Applications published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd


-----

due to electrical degradation of a-Si:H layers for temperature above

250[]C,[6] such device concept has limited compatibility with standard

solar cell manufacturing processes. An alternative type of CSPC fea
turing higher thermal budget was proposed by Yablonovich et al[7]and

is the so-called semi-insulating polycrystalline silicon (SIPOS) hetero
structure as a mixture of microcrystalline silicon and silicon oxide.

Several research groups [8,9] have recently further developed such

device scheme consisting of an ultra-thin silicon oxide (SiO2) (<2 nm)

layer grown on the c-Si surfaces [10] coated by in situ or ex situ doped

polycrystalline silicon (poly-Si) layer deposited via low
pressure/plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition (LP/PECVD)

techniques.[11] The thin SiO2 provides excellent chemical passivation of

c-Si interface defects and also acts as a barrier that allows the collec
tion of only majority carriers at poly-Si contact.[12] The transport princi
ple at this junction may occur via tunneling[13,14] and/or via pin-holes

present at c-Si/SiO2 interface.[15] This passivation scheme has proved

to give excellent passivation properties[16] with implied open-circuit

voltage (iVOC) obtained up to 730 mV and saturation current density

(J0) well below 10 fA/cm[2]. Moreover, as typical process temperatures

are above approximately 900[]C, such devices exhibit high thermal sta
bility and are, in principle, compatible with conventional metallization

techniques.


passivation quality is investigated monitoring effective carriers' life
time (τeff), implied open-circuit voltage (iVOC), and saturation current

density (J0). Supported by TCAD simulations, we also evaluate the

effects of doping profile in poly-Si/SiO2/c-Si stack on passivation

quality and band alignment for carrier collection. The investigated

layers are tested on completed devices in a rear emitter configuration

with a textured-front and a flat-rear side in a lean and TCO-free

manufacturing process. We discuss the relation among short-circuit

current density (JSC), open-circuit voltage (VOC), and fill factor (FF) for

different poly-Si thicknesses.


**2** | **EXPERIMENTAL DETAILS**

Double side polished, <100>-oriented, 280-μm-thick, n-type c-Si

float-zone (FZ) wafers with a resistivity of 2.5 Ωcm (Doping concen
tration of 1.810[15] cm[−][3]) are used as starting material to prepare both

symmetric lifetime samples and solar cells. Firstly, the substrates are

cleaned in 99% and 69.5% nitric acid (HNO3) both for 10 minutes in

order to remove organic and metallic particles, respectively. Some

wafers are chemically textured on both sides in an alkaline solution

containing H2O, TMAH, and Alkatex to obtain random pyramids.

Before processing, we remove the native oxide via a short HF dip, and

afterwards, we wet-chemically oxidize the c-Si surfaces using a nitric

acid solution to grow an approximately 1.5-nm-thick SiO2 buffer layer

as described in Yang et al.[17] The samples are then coated with intrin
sic amorphous silicon layer deposited by a Tempress LPCVD reactor

at a temperature of 580[]C, pressure of 150 mTorr, and SiH4 flow of

45 sccm. The deposition time is adapted to obtain layers with thick
ness of 250, 75, 35, and 20 nm. Ex situ doping of the poly-Si layers is

performed via ion implantation using a Varian EHP500 implanter.

Phosphorous (P) and boron (B) are implanted, selecting an energy of

10 keV and 5 keV, respectively, with variable dose from 510[15] to

1.210[16] ions/cm[2]. Figure 1A,B sketches the symmetric samples fabri
cated in this work.


Poly-silicon based CSPCs are successfully applied at cell level

using different device architectures, such as IBC solar cells[17-22]with a

remarkable efficiency over 26%[23] or bifacial[24] and FBC solar cells.[25]

Similarly, promising hybrid concepts combining homo-junction with

poly-Si CSPC are under research as front homo-junction and CSPC at

the back side[26] with experimental η very close to 26% and selective

front surface field (FSF) architecture and rear poly-Si CSPC[27] with


modelled η also in the range of 26%.

Poly-Si has been applied at the front side of FBC solar cells with


transparent conductive oxide (TCO)[28] or with SiNx as anti-reflection

coating[29] for tandem device applications or at the rear side of indus
trial n-type wafer-based FBC cells[30,31] However, placing thick poly-Si

layers at the front side of a solar cell induces consistent parasitic

absorption[32] estimated in the range of 1.5 mA/cm[2] each 30 nm of

poly-Si.[33] Furthermore, poly-Si accounts for free carrier absorption

(FCA) in the near infrared (NIR) wavelength range.[34] Therefore, into

an attempt to obtain more transparent high-thermal budget CSPCs,

poly-Si layer has been alloyed with oxygen[35,36] or carbon[37] and

applied in FBC devices in combination with a-Si:H–based CSPC at the

textured front side.[38,39] Notwithstanding the promising results at both

passivation level and cell level, these alloys are still not optically

optimal[35,40] presenting higher absorption coefficient than c-Si in the

visible range and FCA in the NIR range, just like poly-Si.[41] Thus, to

minimize these optical losses due to poly-Si layers while keeping high

their passivation quality, a careful surface engineering has to be

performed.


Afterwards, the samples are annealed in a tube furnace to acti
vate and diffuse the implanted dopants within the a-Si lattice and,

concurrently, to obtain poly-Si layer. Annealing temperature for sam
ples in Figure 1A,B is either 950[]C or 850[]C, and annealing time is

variable between 5 and 90 minutes, depending on the thickness of

the poly-Si layer. Eventually, a forming gas annealing (FGA) at 400[]C

for 2 hours (10% H2 in N2) is performed to enhance chemical passiv
ation at c-Si/SiO2 interface.[42] Quasi-steady-state photoconductance

lifetime measurements (QSSPC)[43] are performed using a Sinton

Instruments WCT-120 on the symmetric samples in Figure 1A,B to

assess the surface passivation quality of the fabricated structures.

Effective carriers' lifetime (τeff) is evaluated at low injection level

(Δn = 10[15] cm[−][3]); implied open-circuit voltage (iVOC) and recombina
tion current density (J0) are extracted from the measured curves at

high injection level (Δn = 10[16] cm[−][3]). Furthermore, electro
capacitance voltage (ECV) technique is employed on the same

samples to investigate the active doping concentration profile from


In this work, we present the optimization of n- and p-type

implanted poly-Si contacts deposited by LPCVD on top of ultra-thin

chemical SiO2. We optimize both implantation dose/energy and

annealing time/temperature while thinning the poly-Si layer thickness

from 250 to 20 nm The effect of the layer thickness on the


the doped layers into the c-Si substrate


-----

FIGURE 1 Symmetric samples
with (A) SiO2/n-type poly-Si on
textured c-Si wafer, (B) SiO2/p-type
poly-Si on flat c-Si wafer, and (C) poly_poly solar cell sketch with variable_
front/rear poly-Si thicknesses
between 250 and 20 nm [Colour
figure can be viewed at
[wileyonlinelibrary.com]](http://wileyonlinelibrary.com)

Solar cells are fabricated by combining the layer stacks optimized


for implantation and annealing performed at optimized

temperature/time depending on the poly-Si thickness. Forming gas

annealing at 400[]C for 2 hours is eventually deployed to increase

chemical passivation. The solar cells are characterized using a cali
brated, class AAA, Wacom WXS-156S solar simulator to extract the

following cell parameters: Voc, FF, Jsc, and η. External quantum effi
ciency (EQE) is measured by an in-house built setup, and a cali
brated mono-silicon diode with known spectral response was used

as a reference. Sinton SunsVOC setup allows to measure pseudo

parameters, such as pseudo-FF (pFF), which excludes the series

resistance contribution.


in a poly-poly configuration (see Figure 1C). The process is shown in

Figure 2. Because our p-type poly-Si layer for textured surface is still

under development, we locate the hole contact at rear side on a flat

interface. The choice of rear-emitter architecture additionally

improves the transport of minority carriers inside c-Si bulk as dis
cussed by Larionova et al[44] and Bivour et al[45] for the case of silicon

heterojunction solar cells. Only the front side of the c-Si wafer is tex
tured (see Figure 2A), by covering the other side with 100-nm-thick

SiNx protective layer. After SiNx removal and cleaning, SiO2 and

doped poly-Si stack are deposited as described above. In particular,

we fabricate devices with 250, 75, and 35 nm of poly-Si layer on both

the front and the rear side.


Accurate opto-electrical simulations of poly-poly solar cells are

performed using a modelling framework based on TCAD

Sentaurus,[47-51]combining thin film optics and opto-electrical proper
ties, such as free carrier absorption. The simulated structure is

reported in Figure 1C using experimentally extracted wavelength
dependent refractive index of poly-Si.[52] From each simulated absorp
tion profile, equivalent photocurrent densities are calculated. We

assume here that all the light absorbed in the front or rear layers

(except the c-Si absorber) is parasitically absorbed and contributes


After tunneling SiO2 formation (see Figure 2B), the LPCVD

intrinsic amorphous silicon layers are implanted with P or B and co
annealed at the optimal temperature according to the passivation

study (see Figure 2C). To minimize reflection losses, a 75-nm-thick

SiNx layer is deposited by PECVD on the textured front side

(see Figure 2D) and finally, the cells are completed with metal con
tacts (see Figure 2E). At rear side, a stack of Ag/Cr/Al (200 nm/30

nm/2 μm) is evaporated through a hard mask to define the cell area

of 2.8 cm × 2.8 cm (7.84 cm[2]), while, at the front side, a 2-μm-thick

e-beam evaporated Al metal grid (5% metal coverage) is structured

via photolithography, etching of SiNx ARC, evaporation, and lift
off.[27] Additionally, the front grid of some solar cells is Cu-plated by

means of a mask-less process (plating current density of

576 mA/cm[2] for 1500 s) using evaporated titanium as seed layer.[46]

For solar cells with decoupled front/rear poly-Si thicknesses, the

fabrication process consists in repeating twice the SiO2/poly-Si

deposition using a SiNx layer to protect one of the wafer's surface

and a poly-Si etching in between. Poly-Si layer is etched in a mix
ture of HF/HNO3 and H2O. We keep the rear side thickness at

250 nm while the front layer is varied from 250 nm down to

20 nm. The cell precursors are then processed as described above


therefore to current losses.

**3** | **RESULTS AND DISCUSSION**


**3.1** | **c-Si surface passivation by poly-Si selective**
**contacts**

From Raman spectrum reported in Figure 3, it is clear that before high

temperature annealing at 950[]C, silicon is deposited in an amorphous

state (black curve). After high temperature annealing (red curve), the


crystallinity fraction increases up to 90%.

Table 1 summarizes the implantation parameters tested for the


SiO2/n-type poly-Si stack on textured substrates with the symmetric


FIGURE 2 Steps for fabrication of poly-poly solar cell; (A) starting material one sided textured wafer, (B) tunneling oxide formation;
(c) LPCVD a-Si deposition, implantation, and annealing, (D) anti-reflection coating deposition, and (E) front/rear metallization [Colour figure can be
[viewed at wileyonlinelibrary com]](http://wileyonlinelibrary.com)


-----

across the SiO2/poly-Si structure for the case of 75-nm-thick poly-Si

implanted with fixed dose of 10[16] ions/cm[2] and annealed at 950[]C

for 5 minutes and 850[]C for 90 minutes, respectively. The sample

annealed at 950[]C (green curve in Figure 4) confines 10[20] P atoms

into poly-Si layer, and a similar amount is diffused into c-Si bulk. For

the case of 850[]C (red curve in Figure 4), the junction depth is

shallower with approximately 10[20] P atoms confined into the poly-Si

layer. The doping profile decreases with a sharp tail into the c-Si with

10[18] atoms near the c-Si/SiO2 interface. This doping diffusion into

c-Si bulk facilitates carrier transport across the junction[60,61]

Consequently, different doping profiles lead to a different passivation

properties thanks to the higher Auger recombination contribution that

is estimated to be 40% higher in case of 950[]C annealed sample. We

measure τeff = 0.8 ms and τeff = 2.2 ms for the sample annealed at

950[]C and 850[]C, respectively. The difference in passivation perfor
mance is due to different distribution of dopants inside crystalline sili
con at the interface with tunneling oxide. Indeed, the electrical field

across the junction depends on spatial variation of potential energy by

incorporating dopant species. In case of constant doping before/after

the interface with tunneling oxide, the electrical field is negligible,

explaining the lack of field-effect passivation in case of sample

annealed 950[]C (see Figure 4).


FIGURE 3 Raman spectra of as-deposited LPCVD a-Si and
annealed poly-Si at 950[]C [Colour figure can be viewed at
[wileyonlinelibrary.com]](http://wileyonlinelibrary.com)

structure reported in Figure 1A. The poly-Si layer thickness is kept

constant at 250 nm for the three samples fabricated while the P

implantation is performed at an energy of 10 keV. Sample n1 receives

a dose of 7.510[15] ions/cm[2], while for samples n2 and n3, implantation

dose is 10[16] ions/cm[2]. All the samples undergo the same annealing

process for 5 minutes at temperature of 950[]C, and the FGA is tested

only for sample n3. Surface passivation quality of the fabricated sam
ples is reported in the same Table 1. Sample n1, implanted at lower

dose, exhibits relatively low performance with τeff = 0.8 ms, J0 =

72 fA/cm[2], and iVOC = 664 mV. When implantation dose is increased

up to 110[16] ions/cm[2] (sample n2), lifetime increases up to 1.8 milli
seconds, and J0 decreases to 39 fA/cm[2] with improved iVOC up to

688 mV. The better passivation properties observed for increased

implantation dose can be explained by the higher doping concentra
tion into poly-Si layer that enhances carrier selectivity inducing a

stronger electrical field across the junction.[53] A similar trend has been

observed in literature by other researchers.[14,54,55] Finally, we test the

effect of FGA on the investigated stack (sample n3), measuring a sig
nificant improvement in the passivation properties. In particular, we

measured τeff = 4.6 ms, J0 = 14.5 fA/cm[2], and iVOC > 700 mV. Sample

_n3 benefits from the FGA treatment owing to the diffusion of H[+]_

atoms into the stack, enhancing chemical passivation at the c-Si/SiO2
interface.[42,56] Similar results about FGA have been reported in Peibst

et al,[57] although in our case, the implantation dose is higher than typi
cal literature values[58,59] with similar annealing conditions.


After the optimal temperature is found, we optimize the doping

level for the 75-nm-thick n-type poly-Si by sweeping implantation


FIGURE 4 ECV measurement of phosphorous doping
concentration profile as function of the depth in 75-nm-thick n-type
poly-Si contact implanted with a dose of 10[16] cm[−][2] and energy of
10 keV and annealed at different temperatures and times. Reported
τeff indicated for each sample is probed at Δn = 10[15] cm[−][3] [Colour
[figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]](http://wileyonlinelibrary.com)


Next, we investigate the effect of poly-Si layer thickness on pas
sivation. Figure 4 depicts the phosphorous concentration profile


TABLE 1 Lifetime measurements on symmetric samples based on textured wafers and passivated by SiO2/poly-Si (250-nm-thick, n-type) as
shown in Figure 1A

**Annealing** **FGA** **RSH, Ω/sq**

**Sample** **Energy, keV** **Dose, ions/cm[2]** **Temp,** []C **Time, min** **τeff @ 10[15]** **cm[−][3], ms** **J0, fA/cm[2]** **iVoc, mV**


_n1_ 10 7.510[15] 950 5 No 0.8 72.0 664 150

_n2_ 10 1.010[16] 950 5 No 1.8 39.0 688 135

_n3_ 10 1.010[16] 950 5 Yes 4.6 14.5 709 130


-----

dose in the range from 0.510[16] ions/cm[2] to 1.210[16] ions/cm[2].

Annealing temperature is kept at 850[]C for 90 minutes. The

corresponding carrier lifetime curves versus minority carrier density

are reported in Figure 5. The layer implanted with a dose of 510[15]

ions/cm[2] exhibited the lowest τeff (0.5 ms), with a poor behavior at

low injection level. By increasing the dose up to 7.510[15] and 110[16]

ions/cm[2], the lifetime curves shift up in the entire injection level with

a τeff ~ 2 ms. Further increasing the dose up to 1.210[16] ions/cm[2], τeff
degrades down to 0.5 milliseconds with a severe effect on the surface

passivation (iVoc = 663 mV). In these cases, sheet resistance is varying

from 310 Ω/sq (D = 510[15] cm[2]) to 200 Ω/sq (D = 10[16] cm[2]). As for

the case of 250-nm-thick poly-Si, implantation dose lower than 10[16]

ions/cm[2] does not induce such strong electric field across the junction

to increase carrier-selectivity. On the other hand, a dose higher than

10[16] ions/cm[2] induces lower lifetime. This is because the resulting

junction is Auger-limited with a J0 = 95 fA/cm[2], according to a qualita
tive simulation run by EDNA 2.[62] The optimum for 75-nm-thick poly
Si layer is found indeed for a dose of 110[16] ions/cm[2]. In this case, J0
= 14 fA/cm[2] and iVOC = 703 mV indicate a trade-off between optimal

surface vs Auger recombination mechanisms.


while measuring a fairly constant J0 = 14.5 fA/cm[2], independently

from the poly-Si thickness. This means that the chemical passivation

is excellent in all the three samples. A similar trend has been observed

in literature.[33,63]


A similar study is performed on B-implanted poly-Si CSPC on flat


substrate. Table 2 shows τeff, J0, and iVOC in as-annealed condition

and after FGA treatment for the case of 250-nm-thick poly-Si layer.

The samples are implanted with 5 keV as ion energy and a dose of

510[15] ions/cm[2]. Annealing is at temperature of 950[]C and time is

5 minutes.

For sample p1, after annealing for dopants activation and crystalli

zation, we measure τeff = 3.8 ms, J0 = 19 fA/cm[2], and iVOC = 704 mV.

For sample p2, which subsequently received also FGA, it is evident

that hydrogenation treatment via FGA is capable of increasing lifetime

by 25% relative with respect to p1 with τeff = 5.2 ms and J0 = 12.5

fA/cm[2]. Furthermore, iVOC increases by more than 10 mV, up to

716 mV. As in case of the electron-selective contact, we investigate

the effect of thinning the p-type poly-Si layer on passivation proper
ties. When the p-type poly-Si layer is 75 nm thick, an annealing at

950[]C is not suitable to perfectly confine the boron doping into poly
Si layer. For this reason, annealing temperature is scaled down to

850[]C and time is increased to 90 minutes. As for n-type poly-Si

layers, a series of different implantation doses from 510[15] to 10[16]

ions/cm[2] is performed.

Figure 7 shows QSSPC lifetime curves of symmetric samples pas

Figure 6A shows optimal doping profile for 250-, 75-, and 35-nm
thick poly-Si layers and their corresponding τeff and J0. For the

35-nm-thick poly-Si layer, we obtain a sharp doping profile for an

annealing performed at 850[]C for 45 minutes. We obtain a not fully
optimized 75-nm-thick layer because its doping profile (shown in

Figure 6A), albeit decaying as steeply as the other two cases into c-Si

bulk, does not keep high concentration as close as possible to the

poly-Si/SiO2 interface. Therefore, a less effective field-effect passiv
ation is in place for this sample. Consequently, both 250- and 35-nm
thick poly-Si layers exhibit τeff above 4.5 milliseconds, while the

75-nm-thick one is limited at 2.3 milliseconds. Sheet resistance of

35-nm-thick poly-Si layer is 270 Ω/sq. The three samples depicted in

Figure 6A have approximately 10[20] phosphorous atoms/cm[3] into the

poly-Si layer, while the doping tail in the c-Si bulk becomes not signifi
cant after about 100 nm. Figure 6B summarizes these τeff results


sivated by SiO2/p-type poly-Si stack with different implantation doses

and ion energy = 5 keV. By increasing implantation dose, the curves

shift towards higher carrier lifetimes. The highest passivation quality

is measured for 10[16] ions/cm[2] with τeff = 2.3 ms, J0 = 23 fA/cm[2], and

iVOC = 691 mV. In this case, sheet resistance is 285 Ω/sq. For lower

doses, as the doping level into poly-Si is not optimal, lifetime is limited

at approximately 1 millisecond.


Figure 8A shows doping profiles of 250-, 75-, and 35-nm-thick

p-type poly-Si samples. In the case of 250-nm-thick layer, 10[20] B

atoms/cm[3] are confined well into the poly-Si layer and its doping tail

in c-Si bulk, ensuring τeff > 5 ms. For the 75-nm-thick sample

(see Figure 8A, red line), the doping level into poly-Si is around

approximately 310[20] B atoms/cm[3], and it decreases in c-Si bulk such

that after 100 nm in c-Si bulk, there are 10[18] B atoms/cm[3], giving a

weaker field-effect passivation (τeff = 2.3 ms) than the case of

250-nm-thick poly-Si. When 35-nm-thick poly-Si is deposited, the

B-doping concentration at c-Si/SiO2/poly-Si junction is on the order

of 10[20] cm[−][3] on both sides of the SiO2 tunneling layer, causing almost

no field-effect passivation, and therefore, lifetime is 0.5 milliseconds.

In this case, sheet resistance is 263 Ω/sq. In this case, also Auger

recombination plays a role in the recombination processes. Since

boron is a light atom (atomic mass unit of 11), its diffusivity into silicon

is greater than that of phosphorous[64]; therefore, having already lim
ited the annealing temperature to 850[]C to prevent unwanted diffu
sion of boron into the c-Si bulk, the annealing time could be reduced

further. On the other hand, boron typically needs higher activation

temperatures than phosphorous,[64] thus narrowing the optimization

window of B-implanted poly-Si In the two thicker layers junction


FIGURE 5 QSSPC lifetime measurements of 75-nm-thick n-type
poly-Si symmetric samples on textured wafer sweeping implantation
dose (D) from 0.510[16] to 1.210[16] ions/cm[2] [Colour figure can be
[viewed at wileyonlinelibrary com]](http://wileyonlinelibrary.com)


-----

FIGURE 6 (A) ECV measurement
of phosphorous doping concentration
profile as function of the depth in
250-, 75-, and 35-nm-thick n-type
poly-Si; (B) τeff and J0 versus poly-Si
thickness [Colour figure can be
[viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]](http://wileyonlinelibrary.com)

TABLE 2 Implantation and annealing parameters for symmetric samples on polished wafers with 250-nm-thick B-doped poly-Si


**Annealing** **FGA**

**Sample** **Energy, keV** **Dose, ions/cm[2]** **Temp,** []C **Time, min** **τeff @ 10[15]** **cm[−][3], ms** **_J0, fA/cm[2]_** **_iVoc, mV_** **RSH, Ω/sq**


_p1_ 5 510[15] 950 5 No 3.8 19.0 704 134

_p2_ 5 510[15] 950 5 Yes 5.2 12.5 716 130


_Note. Measured passivation quality parameters: τeff, J0, and iVOC._


is higher than the one used for 250-nm-thick layer. This might be cau
sed by a more complicated incorporation of B dopants into thinner

poly-Si layers. A possible way to minimize junction depth is to use

lower implantation energy,[65] which is unfortunately not possible in

our setup. Figure 8B summarizes all the results obtained so far about

p-type poly-Si passivating contact for different thicknesses. It shows

that τeff increases when poly-Si thickness increases with an opposite

trend for J0. For the 35-nm-thick B-doped poly-Si layer, low lifetime

of 0.5 milliseconds, iVOC of 655 mV, and J0 ~ 100 fA/cm[2] are

obtained, indicating overall that also chemical passivation is affected,

most likely by inactive clusters of B atoms acting as recombination

centers. For both hole-selective and electron-selective contacts,

annealing temperature is higher when the poly-Si thickness is in the

range of 250 nm. This is also partially confirmed in Yan et al[66],where a

BBr3 diffusion instead of ion implantation is used as ex situ doping

technique. Finally, also for our hole-selective poly-Si contacts, implan
tation doses are much higher than the state of the art.[67],We believe

that this might be due to different density of the poly-Si layers.


FIGURE 7 QSSPC lifetime curves of 75-nm-thick p-type poly-Si
on flat wafer sweeping implantation dose (D) for a fixed ion energy at
5 keV. The samples are annealed at 850[]C for 90 minutes [Colour
[figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]](http://wileyonlinelibrary.com)

depths are optimized such that doping unbalance at the junction is

high enough to induce strong electrical field, while in the 35-nm-thick

case, diffusion of dopants is rather high causing weak electrical field

at the junction and also high Auger recombination. Furthermore, we

observe that the optimized implantation dose for thinner poly-Si layer


For a deeper understanding of our results, we simulated, by

means of our TCAD Sentaurus modelling platform,[51] the energy band

diagrams of both n-type and p-type poly-Si CSPCs based on the mea
sured doping concentration profiles shown in Figures 6A and 8A of

FIGURE 8 (A) ECV measurement
of boron doping concentration in
250-, 75-, and 35-nm-thick B-doped
poly-Si and (B) corresponding τeff and
J0 measured on symmetric samples on
double side polished wafer as
function of poly-Si thickness [Colour
figure can be viewed at
[wileyonlinelibrary com]](http://wileyonlinelibrary.com)


-----

n-type and p-type poly-Si contacts, respectively. Figure 9A reports in

the top panel the measured phosphorous doping concentration pro
files and in the bottom panel the corresponding conduction energy

level together with the Fermi energy level in equilibrium of n-type

poly-Si/SiO2/c-Si junction simulated for different poly-Si thicknesses.

For n-type contact, a strong band bending is observed for the 250
and 35-nm-thick samples, revealing a stronger field-effect passivation

than that related to the 75-nm-thick sample. This is compatible with

the measured lifetime achieved by n-type poly-Si (see Figure 6B). In

particular, strong electrical field across the junction is induced by high

electron density at the interface. This has the effect to place the con
duction band energy level below the Fermi level in c-Si. This mecha
nism is the effect of the optimized doping profile across the junction.

This effect, together with high doping level at poly-Si side, leads to a

band alignment which is crucial for transport through tunneling

oxide.[51] In the case of 75 nm (red curves in Figure 8A), the conduction

band is above the Fermi level. This leads a relatively weak electrical

field across the junction and less efficient tunneling. It is important to

highlight that, in c-Si bulk, high doping profile potentially boosts trans
port through tunneling oxide, but also increases Auger recombination.

Therefore, the doping tail in c-Si bulk should be kept such sharp to

obtain the effect of higher electron accumulation only at c-Si/SiO2
interface.

A similar analysis has been carried out regarding the p-type poly

We can conclude that an ideal doping profile should have high

doping concentration at c-Si/SiO2 interface to enhance collection of

carriers, but at the same time, it should have a relatively shallow dop
ing tail such that Auger recombination is minimized. Accordingly,

reduced layer thickness in both electron and hole-selective contact

requires a careful tuning of implantation dose, annealing temperature

and time to confine the dopants atoms into poly-Si layer, leaving a


sufficiently high doping tail that results in better passivation quality.

**3.2** | **Solar cells**


The optimized carrier-selective contacts discussed in Section 3.1 are

integrated into poly-poly solar cells. We combine the n-type and

p-type poly-Si layers with different thicknesses at the front and rear

side of the device, respectively.


Table 3 summarizes the different poly-poly solar cells fabricated

and the external parameters of the devices. SC1 with 250-nm-thick

poly-Si on both front and rear sides exhibits VOC = 684 mV, JSC =

32 mA/cm[2], and FF = 68.7%. As this cell has not received the FGA

treatment, it appears to be limited by the n-type poly-Si. In fact, its

VOC is in line with the iVOCs values shown in Table 1 for sample n2

(iVOCn,poly,250nm = 688 mV before FGA), which was used for this

device. FF lies below 70%, most likely because lateral transport is

mostly supported by the large doping tail in c-Si at the front electron

contact. Also, the lack of a TCO as transport layer plays an important

role in FF values. In a similar solar cell architecture[29] with a 200-nm
thick poly-Si, VOC was found 10 mV lower than ours and FF 4% abso
lute higher than ours. Those parameters were obtained by screen
printed front contacts that introduce higher recombination but also

ensure lower contact resistivity than our PVD-evaporated contacts. In

our case, contact resistivity of poly-Si layer with Al contacts, mea
sured via transfer length method (TLM), is 0.1 mΩcm[2]. This relatively

low value does not have impact on series resistance of our devices.

By decreasing front and rear poly-Si thicknesses to 75 nm (SC2 in

Table 2), VOC decreases to 663 mV, but FF goes up to 72.8%. This

result is also obtained without FGA treatment. When 35-nm-thick

poly-Si is employed (SC3 in Table 2), we measure an improved VOC up

to 675 mV with a gain of 12 mV as compared with SC2. This improve
ment in VOC is due to the FGA treatment, as demonstrated in the case

of passivation tests of both electron- and hole-selective contacts.


Si contact. Figure 9B shows in the top panel the measured doping

profile and in the bottom panel the corresponding valence energy

level together with the Fermi energy level in equilibrium of p-type

poly-Si/SiO2/c-Si junction simulated for different poly-Si thicknesses.

In this case, the doping profiles of 250- and 75-nm-thick cases induce

a strong valence band bending and, therefore, a strong electrical field.

Similarly, the valence bands of poly-Si and c-Si exhibit an alignment

above the Fermi energy level, for which tunneling is expected to be

efficient for all the samples. However, the depth of the doping profile

tail inside c-Si limits the passivation as Auger recombination is higher

for deeper doping profiles. Accordingly, 250-, 75-, and 35-nm-thick

poly-Si samples exhibit doping profiles as deep as 100 nm, 250 nm,

and 300 nm inside c-Si, respectively. The passivation quality observed

in Figure 8B highlights the effect of Auger recombination on the pas
sivation in terms of τeff and J0. Therefore, in our experimental frame
work, the 250-nm-thick poly-Si sample exhibits the best potential for

p-type poly-Si contact in solar cells.


FIGURE 9 (A) Top panel:
measured doping profile (in log-log
scale) in the stack n-type polySi/SiO2/c-Si; bottom panel:
corresponding band diagram for
different poly-Si thicknesses; (B) top
panel: measured doping profile (in loglog scale) in the stack p-type polySi/SiO2/c-Si; bottom panel:
corresponding band diagram for
different poly-Si thicknesses [Colour
figure can be viewed at
[wileyonlinelibrary com]](http://wileyonlinelibrary.com)


-----

TABLE 3 _Poly-poly solar cells results with different combination of front/rear poly-Si thickness and eventual FGA_

**Solar cell** **FGA** **dfront/rear [nm]** **VOC [mV]** **JSC [mA/cm[2]]** **FF [%]** **η [%]** **ηactive [%]** **pFF [%]**


_SC1_ No 250/250 684 32.0 68.7 15.0 15.8 82.9

_SC2_ No 75/75 663 36.0 72.8 17.3 18.2 82.0

_SC3_ Yes 35/35 675 36.5 71.0 17.5 18.4 82.5

_SC4_ Yes 35/250 701 35.1 72.8 17.9 18.8 82.3

_SC5_ Yes 20/250 689 36.5 73.0 18.4 19.3 82.1

_SC6[a]_ Yes 20/250 682 36.3 75.2 18.7 19.6 84.0


_Note. Reported external parameters are for Al-based front contacted solar cells; The cell sketch is reported in Figure 1C._
aTi-seeded Cu-plated front contacts.


Accordingly, we highlight that FGA treatment is critical to improve

both passivation and transport properties of this type of selective

contacts. In this case, FF is reduced to 71%. We speculate that this FF

reduction is due to a different lateral transport through the front con
tact owing to different doping profile in poly-Si layers. Short circuit

current density is very poor for SC1 (32 mA/cm[2]). We measure an

improvement of approximately 4 mA/cm[2] when 75-nm-thick poly-Si

layers are employed. Further improvement up to 36.5 mA/cm[2] is

observed in case of SC3. When front and rear thicknesses are

decoupled to 35 nm at the front and 250 nm at the back (SC4), VOC is

701 mV (the gain is 17 mV compared to SC1), short current density is

35.1 mA/cm[2], and FF is again at 72.8 %, as in SC2. The lower current

might be due to not optimized texturing and anti-reflection coating

thickness. By further thinning the front poly-Si to approximately

20 nm and keeping the rear side poly-Si thickness to 250 nm (SC5),

VOC slightly decreases to 689 mV with respect to SC4, but an increase

in JSC is noted up to 36.5 mA/cm[2] and FF is equal to 73% (ηactive =

19.3%). Finally, the same solar cell as SC5 has been fabricated with Ti
seeded Cu-plated front contacts (SC6), resulting in FF = 75.2%

(approximately 2% absolute higher than SC5) and VOC = 682 mV

(7 mV lower compared with SC5). JSC is 36.3 mA/cm[2], which is slightly

lower than SC5. The overall ηactive is 19.6%. The gain in FF is due to

more conductive Ti/Cu stack respect to the previously used 2-μm
thick e-beam evaporated Al.[68] The reduction in VOC of 7 mV might be

explained by the so-called background-plating[69] that consists in Cu

growing outside the designed fingers areas and acting as deep impu
rity in Si.[70]


FIGURE 10 External quantum efficiency of SC1, SC2, and SC3
[(see Table 1) [Colour figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]](http://wileyonlinelibrary.com)

parasitic absorption in the long wavelength range between 1000 nm

and 1200 nm,[33,34] which, together with the additional parasitic

absorption due to the rear metal contact, contributes to current

losses. From these experiments, we can demonstrate that the front

poly-Si layer should primarily be kept as thin as possible in order to


limit parasitic absorption.

We performed opto-electrical simulations of the abovementioned


_SC1,_ _SC2,_ and _SC3_ devices with TCAD Sentaurus[47,51] using

experimentally-extracted optical properties of poly-Si layers.[52]

Figure 11A shows the simulated absorptance in front and rear poly-Si

layers. The device with 250-nm-thick poly-Si layers shows a consis
tent absorption of the incoming light that peaks up to 0.8 in the short
wavelength range and decays to a negligible value at around 800 nm.

When the thickness of poly-Si layers is reduced to 75 nm and 35 nm,

the absorption strongly decreases in the ultraviolet and visible parts

of the spectrum but still peaks to values close to 0.6. For the rear

poly-Si layer, we observe a weak dependence of absorption against

poly-Si thickness. It is noteworthy to mention that our simulations

take into consideration both front texturing[48] and free carrier absorp
tion into poly-Si given by high doping. By integrating these absorption

profiles with the AM1.5 photon flux,[71] we obtain the equivalent pho
tocurrent density losses (JL) for different poly-poly solar cell configura
tions. The values are shown in Figure 11B, where we observe a strong

dependence of front poly-Si thickness on photocurrent density losses

(J ~ 8 5 mA/cm[2] for SC1 configuration) If the front poly-Si layer is


Figure 10 reports the EQE spectra of SC1, SC2, and SC3, clearly

showing the losses in the short-wavelength part of the spectrum due

to parasitic absorption in the front poly-Si layer. SC2 and SC3 devices

show higher current collection than SC1, because of the reduced para
sitic absorption in the front poly-Si layer. In this respect, there is a

substantial improvement in collection from 380 to 800 nm. Further
more, maximum EQE reached is approximately 90% in both SC1 and

_SC2. This can be explained by electrical recombination occurring at_

the front and rear Si surfaces since no FGA treatment is performed. In

case of SC3, instead, we observe an improved carrier collection across

the whole spectral range up to approximately 97%. This is not only

due to thinner poly-Si layers but also owing to the FGA treatment.

Regardless the poly-Si layers thickness these layers suffer from


-----

FIGURE 11 (A) Simulated
absorptance in front poly-Si
(continuous line) and rear poly-Si
(dashed line) layers for different
thicknesses as used in SC1, SC2, and
_SC3; (B) simulated equivalent_
photocurrent density losses (JL)
related to different front and rear
poly-Si layer thicknesses [Colour
figure can be viewed at
[wileyonlinelibrary.com]](http://wileyonlinelibrary.com)

kept at 35 nm, JL decreases to approximately 2.5 mA/cm[2]. Regarding

absorption in the rear poly-Si, we obtain JL < 1 mA/cm[2] with a weak

dependency on the backside layer thickness. Therefore, in order to

reach, on one hand, relatively high short circuit current density and,

on the other hand, high VOC (see Figure 8), it is necessary to decouple

the front thickness from the rear one. Focusing on the rear side only,

Figure 12 describes the JL of rear poly-Si and rear metal in the

abovementioned cell configurations. Losses due to metal absorption

are limited between 0.4 and 0.5 mA/cm[2], while the losses into rear

poly-Si account for less than 0.25 mA/cm[2]. By adding those two

losses, the total rear losses differ by only about 0.15 mA/cm[2]

between the configurations 35 nm/35 nm and 35 nm/250

nm. Therefore, we justify the decoupling of front/rear poly-Si


Figure 13 shows the simulated and the measured external param
eters of the first four solar cells indicated in Table 3. The simulation

replicates the same conditions as the fabricated solar cells (SiNx anti
reflection coating, 5% coverage metal grid at the front side, Ag/Cr/Al

stack at the rear side). In some cases, measured JSC overcomes simu
lated one (see Figure 13 top-left panel), as a not-optimal calibration of

the model might underestimate the JSC. Regarding VOC (bottom left

graph in Figure 13), measured values are significantly lower than the

simulated ones. In the case of SC1 and SC2, ideal VOC is around

710 mV, for SC3 VOC ~ 695 mV while for SC4 VOC ~ 720 mV. This

confirms our claim of a weak passivation of the 35-nm-thick p-type

poly-Si layer due to its not optimal doping distribution. Indeed, when

we switch from SC3 to SC4, simulated VOC increases of approximately

30 mV. Regarding FF (top-right panel in Figure 13), values of our fabri
cated solar cells are behind the ideal values. All the simulated values

are above 80%, while measured ones are between 68% and 73%. We

ascribe this major difference to high sheet resistance of poly-Si layers

together with the lack of a TCO layer. Moreover, the use of (e-beam)

evaporation for realizing the metallization as well as the not-optimal

thickness of deposited metals also contribute to FF losses. At the end,

the ultimate efficiencies (Figure 13 bottom-right panel) are estimated


thicknesses.

Based on these results, we performed a TCAD simulation of SC1,


_SC2, SC3, and SC4 solar cells to predict their ultimate efficiencies. The_

purpose of these simulations is to have an idea of the pitfalls of our

fabricated poly-poly solar cells. It is also important to note that these

simulations are not optimally calibrated, since they represent a quali
tative indication of the routes to pursue to achieve higher efficiencies

with these devices.


to increase from 17.7% (SC1) to 21.7% (SC4).

Finally, we also simulated SC5 to recognize its ultimate efficiency.


We performed this simulation in two different cases: (a) front electron

selective contact with an ideal doping profile taken from Procel et al[51]

and rear hole-selective contact with the measured doping profile

(see Figure 8) and (b) both front and rear poly-Si contacts with ideal

doping profiles shown in Procel et al.[51]


Table 4 highlights the external parameters of such simulated solar

cells. In the case of front-ideal and rear-measured doping distributions

(SC5-1), VOC is expected to be equal to 723 mV, JSC to 38.3 mA/cm[2],

and FF to 80.3%. The simulated efficiency is thus 22.3%. By

employing an ideal doping profile also at rear (SC5-2), the JSC stays at

the same level as for SC5-1, VOC improves by 2 mV, but most impor
tantly, FF increases by 1.5% absolute. This improvement in FF is

ascribed to an optimal hole transport at the rear side due to the

steeper doping distribution across the junction compared to SC5-1,

which allows an improved hole accumulation at c-Si/SiOx interface

for enhancing the tunneling current. The ideal efficiency is therefore

22 7% In perspective these results are important to understand what


FIGURE 12 Simulated equivalent photocurrent density losses in
backside poly-Si and back Ag contact, depending on poly-poly solar
[cell configuration [Colour figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.](http://wileyonlinelibrary.com)
[com]](http://wileyonlinelibrary.com)


-----

FIGURE 13 Simulated and measured external
parameters of SC1, SC2, SC3, and SC4. Note that
the purpose of these simulations is to have a
qualitative idea of the pitfalls of our fabricated
solar cells

TABLE 4 External parameters of simulated solar cell SC5 with ideal/measured doping profiles


**Solar Cell** **Front Poly-Si Doping Profile** **Rear Poly-Si Doping Profile** **VOC, mV** **JSC, mA/cm[2]** **FF, %** **η, %**


_SC5-1_ Ideal Measured 723 38.3 80.3 22.3


_SC5-2_ Ideal Ideal 725 38.3 81.8 22.7


to improve in our fabricated solar cells. Indeed, FF losses are the main

limiting factor of efficiency of our TCO-free poly-poly solar cells. To

tackle these losses, the outlook is to (a) optimize front metal grid,

(b) lower series resistance by enhancing lateral transport with in
diffusion in c-Si bulk,[72] (c) realize an efficient metallization scheme

(this has already, partially, been demonstrated by Cu-plating), and

(d) develop rear edge-isolation of poly-Si layer to decrease edge

effects on the solar cell operation. Moreover, also, VOC of our solar

cells is affected by non-ideal doping profile. In Procel et al,[51] it is

shown how a semi-squared doping profile across c-Si/SiO2/poly-Si

junction leads to optimal selectivity. In an expansion of this work, this

ideal doping profile (used for simulations shown in Table 4) can be

achieved by in situ doped epitaxially grown layers, LPCVD or PE-CVD

techniques. It is noteworthy to mention that recently, reported

_poly-poly cells based on the PECVD route show VOC beyond 720 mV_

and FF very close to 80%.[73] However, from such experimental results

as well as our simulations, it is possible to recognize that the limit of

these solar cells is the JSC that, even for front poly-Si thickness of

20 nm, does not overcome approximately 38 mA/cm[2]. This is due to

strong parasitic absorption at the front poly-Si layer. To avoid these

losses, there are several different solutions. The first one is to reduce

front poly-Si thickness to dpoly < 10 nm. At that point, a TCO transport

layer will be necessary to ensure good fill-factor.[74-76] Another possi
ble solution is to change the front side structure with either amor
phous silicon or a lightly doped homojunction front surface field with

poly-Si passivating contacts only underneath the contacts. Figure 14

shows the EQE of SC3, a hybrid solar cell from,[39] and a PeRFeCT solar

cell from [27] With both the hybrid and the PeRFeCT architectures


FIGURE 14 External quantum efficiency of poly-poly SC3, a
hybrid solar cell with front side based on intrinsic amorphous silicon
passivation and rear p-type poly-Si[34] and PERFeCT solar cell[22]

[[Colour figure can be viewed at wileyonlinelibrary.com]](http://wileyonlinelibrary.com)


losses in the blue part of the spectrum can be mitigated. The poor res
ponsivity at the short-wavelength of our poly-poly cell is much less

problematic if such architecture is deployed in a tandem configuration

together with a thin-film top cell such as perovskite,[29] either in a

monolithic configuration or in a four-terminal configuration.[77]


**4** | **CONCLUSION**

In this paper, we optimize poly-Si layers as carrier-selective passiv
ating contacts prepared by LPCVD and boron- or phosphorous

-----

doped via ion implantation. With the aim to reduce parasitic

absorption in the poly-Si layers, their thickness is drastically

reduced from 250 to 35 nm, and both passivation quality and junc
tion profile are investigated on symmetric samples by varying ion

dose and annealing treatment (ie, temperature/time). For SiO2/n
type poly-Si fabricated on textured c-Si wafers, we obtain J0 <

15 fA/cm[2] regardless the deposited poly-Si thickness. For these

samples, carrier lifetimes above 4 milliseconds are measured for

both the thickest and thinnest investigated poly-Si layers. On the

contrary, 75-nm-thick layer exhibits τeff ~ 2 ms, due to not
optimized doping profile that leads to a degraded field-effect pas
sivation. ECV measurements confirm this hypothesis indicating, for

an acceptable passivation quality, a shallow junction depth into c-Si

bulk and 10[20] P atoms/cm[3] confined into poly-Si layer for the

250-nm and 35-nm-thick samples. Regarding the SiO2/p-type poly
Si, passivation quality increases with poly-Si thickness. This result is

the consequence of an easier doping confinement in 250-nm-thick

poly-Si. Although we changed implantation dose and annealing

temperature/time, doping profile has a wide junction depth when

thinner poly-Si is employed, leading to weaker field-effect

passivation.


efficiency of our solar cells is mainly limited by FF losses coming

from various sources: (a) not-optimized front metal grid, (b) series

resistance given by poor lateral transport due the small in-diffusion

in c-Si bulk, (c) thin metallization scheme, and (d) no rear edge
isolation of poly-Si structure. With all these adjustments, we fore
cast efficiencies greater than 21% in single junction configuration.

It is remarkable that processing of this solar cell consists in only

four steps, and therefore, it is suitable for industrial up taking with

further engineering. The authors believe that this solar cell archi
tecture is a good candidate for a bottom cell in tandem configura
tion with emerging technologies such as perovskite. Indeed, given

its high thermal budget and the poor responsivity in the blue part

of the spectrum, it matches all the requirements for a fabrication

of both two and four terminal tandem devices.


**ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS**

The authors would like to thank ADEM program for funding this

research under the grant TUD-P18 and Martijn Tijssen for his


technical help with PVD evaporator.

**ORCID**


We evaluated the effect of doping profile on field-effect pas
sivation and band alignment on the basis of TCAD simulations.

Accordingly, the experimentally optimized doping profile maximizes

the trade-off between electrical field and Auger recombination by

means of high doping concentration at c-Si surface and thinner

buried doping profile inside c-Si, concurrently. The optimized p
and n-type SiO2/poly-Si contacts are tested in completed TCO-free

FBC poly-poly solar cells with SiNx as anti-reflection coating. It is

important to remark that the fabrication process is lean, such that

it has only four steps. By decreasing front/rear poly-Si thicknesses,

as expected, more incoming light can reach the c-Si without being

parasitically absorbed in the front stack. We measure a gain in JSC
up to 4 mA/cm[2] when switching from 250- to 35-nm-thick front

poly-Si. Moreover, we have shown that most of the optical losses

are in the short-wavelength range. In fact, according to TCAD sim
ulations, equivalent photo current density losses are highly depen
dent on front poly-Si thickness, while the equivalent photocurrent

density lost at the rear side in the long-wavelength range is only

0.15 mA/cm[2] when switching the rear side poly-Si thickness from

250 to 35 nm. Therefore, we decouple the front/rear poly-Si thick
nesses, keeping the p-type on the rear side at 250 nm and thinning

the film on the front down to 35 nm to concurrently optimize

transparency of the front film and p-type passivation at rear. This

cell (SC4) exhibits a VOC of 701 mV with a gain of 17 mV as com
pared with the device with thicker p-type poly-Si (SC1). Further

decrease in the front n-poly-Si layer down to 20 nm leads to a

trade-off between VOC (decreased to 689 mV) and JSC (increased

to approximately 36 mA/cm[2]). Finally, using Ti-Cu plated front con
tacts, FF increases up to 75.2% while VOC decreases to 682 mV,

ascribed to background plating outside the designated grid area. A

TCAD simulation of our poly-poly solar cells shows that the


_Gianluca Limodio_ [https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9257-8034](https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9257-8034)

_Paul Procel_ [https://orcid.org/0000-0003-4997-3551](https://orcid.org/0000-0003-4997-3551)


_Olindo Isabella_ [https://orcid.org/0000-0001-7673-0163](https://orcid.org/0000-0001-7673-0163)

**REFERENCES**


1. Battaglia C, Cuevas A, Wolf SD. High-efficiency crystalline silicon
solar cells: status and perspectives. Energ Environ Sci. 2016;9:1552[1576. https://doi.org/10.1039/C5EE03380B](https://doi.org/10.1039/C5EE03380B)
[2. Hermle M, Passivated Contacts, John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, https://doi.](https://doi.org/10.1002/9781118927496.ch13)
[org/10.1002/9781118927496.ch13, 125, 135, From Fundamentals](https://doi.org/10.1002/9781118927496.ch13)
to Applications, 2016, John Wiley & Sons.
3. Taguchi M, Yano A, Tohoda S, et al. 24.7% record efficiency HIT solar
[cell on thin silicon wafer. IEEE JPV. 2014;4:1-99 . https://doi.org/10.](https://doi.org/10.1109/JPHOTOV.2013.2282737)
[1109/JPHOTOV.2013.2282737](https://doi.org/10.1109/JPHOTOV.2013.2282737)
4. Adachi D, Hernández JL, Yamamoto K. Impact of carrier recombination on fill factor for large area heterojunction crystalline silicon solar
[cell with 25.1% efficiency. Appl Phys Lett. 2015;107:23-107. https://](https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4937224)
[doi.org/10.1063/1.4937224](https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4937224)
5. Yoshikawa K, Kawasaki H, Yoshida W, et al. Silicon heterojunction
solar cell with interdigitated back contacts for a photoconversion effi[ciency over 26%. Nat Energy. 2017;2(5),8 https://doi.org/10.1038/](https://doi.org/10.1038/nenergy.2017.32)
[nenergy.2017.32](https://doi.org/10.1038/nenergy.2017.32)
6. Wolf SD, Descoeudres A, Holman ZC, Ballif C. High-efficiency silicon
[heterojunction solar cells: a review. Green. 2012;2(1):7-24. https://](https://doi.org/10.1515/green-2011-0018)
[doi.org/10.1515/green-2011-0018](https://doi.org/10.1515/green-2011-0018)
7. Yablonovitch E, Gmitter T, Swanson RM, Kwark YH. A 720 mV open
circuit voltage SiOx:c-Si:SiOx double heterostructure solar cell. Appl
_[Phys Lett. 1985;47:1211. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.96331](https://doi.org/10.1063/1.96331)_
8. Glunz S, Feldmann F, Richter A, Bivour M, Reichel C, Steinkemper H,
Benick J and Hermle M (2015). The irresistible charm of a simple
current flow pattern—25% with a solar cell featuring a full-area back
[contact. https://doi.org/10.4229/EUPVSEC20152015-2BP.1.1.](https://doi.org/10.4229/EUPVSEC20152015-2BP.1.1)
9. Stuckelberger J, Nogay G, Wyss P, Lehmann M, Allebé C, Debrot F,
Ledinsky M, Fejfar A, Despeisse M, Haug FJ, Löper P and Ballif C,
Passivating contacts for silicon solar cells with 800[]C stability based


-----

on tunnel-oxide and highly crystalline thin silicon layer, Photovoltaic
[Specialists Conference (PVSC), 2016 IEEE 43[rd], DOI: https://doi.org/](https://doi.org/10.1109/PVSC.2016.7750100)
[10.1109/PVSC.2016.7750100](https://doi.org/10.1109/PVSC.2016.7750100)
10. Moldovan A, Feldmann F, Zimmer M, Rentsch J, Benick J, Hermle M,
“Tunnel oxide passivated carrier-selective contacts based on ultrathin SiO2 layers” Solar Energy Materials and Solar Cells,Volume 142,
[November 2015, Pages 123-127, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solmat.](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solmat.2015.06.048)
[2015.06.048](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solmat.2015.06.048)
11. LPCVD polysilicon passivating contacts B. (L.J.) Geerligs, M.
Stodolny, Y. Wu, Gutjahr A, Janssen G, Romijn I, Anker J, Bende E,
Ciftpinar H, Lenes M and Luchies JM, Workshop on Crystalline Silicon
Solar Cells and Modules: Materials and Processes, Vail, Co., USA,
28-31 August 2016.
12. Melskens J, van de Loo B, Macco B, Vos M, Palmans J, Smit S and
Kessels W, “Concepts and prospects of passivating contacts for crystalline silicon solar cells,” in IEEE 42nd Photovoltaic Specialist Confer[ence, New Orleans, 2015, DOI: https://doi.org/10.1109/PVSC.2015.](https://doi.org/10.1109/PVSC.2015.7355646)
[7355646.](https://doi.org/10.1109/PVSC.2015.7355646)
13. Feldmann F, Simon M, Bivour M, Reichel C, Hermle M, Glunz SW.
Carrier-selective contacts for Si solar cells. Appl Phys Lett. 2014;104:
[181105. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4875904](https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4875904)
14. Reichel C, Feldmann F, Müller R, et al. Tunnel oxide passivated contacts formed by ion implantation for applications in silicon solar cells.
_[J Appl Phys. 2015;118(20):118. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4936223](https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4936223)_
15. Peibst R, Römer U, Larionova Y, Rienäcker M, Merkle A, Folchert N,
Reiter S, Turcu M, Min B, Krügener J, Tetzlaff D, Bugiel E, Wietler T,
Brendel R, Working principle of carrier selective poly-Si/c-Si junctions: is tunnelling the whole story?, Solar Energy Materials and Solar
_[Cells, Volume 158, Part 1,2016,Pages 60-67, https://doi.org/10.](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solmat.2016.05.045)_
[1016/j.solmat.2016.05.045](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solmat.2016.05.045)
16. Tao Y, Chang EL, Upadhyaya A, Roundaville B, Ok YW, Madani K,
Chen CW, Tate K, Upadhyaya V, Zimbardi F, Keane J, “730 mV
implied Voc enabled by tunnel oxide passivated contact with PECVD
grown and crystallized n + polycrystalline Si,” 2015 IEEE 42nd Photovoltaic Specialist Conference (PVSC), New Orleans, LA, 2015, pp. 1-5.
[doi: https://doi.org/10.1109/PVSC.2015.7356218.](https://doi.org/10.1109/PVSC.2015.7356218)
17. Yang G, Ingenito A, Hameren NV, Isabella O, Zeman M. Design and
application of ion-implanted polySi passivating contacts for interdigitated back contact c-Si solar cells. Appl Phys Lett. 2016;108(3):108.
[https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4940364](https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4940364)
18. Römer U, Merkle A, Peibst R, Ohrdes T, Lim B, Krügener J and
Brendel R, “Ion-implanted poly-Si/c-Si junctions as a back-surface
field in back-junction back-contacted solar cells” in 29th European
Photovoltaic Solar Energy Conference, Amsterdam, The Netherlands,
2014.
19. Haase F, Hollemann C, Schäfer S, et al. Laser contact openings for
local poly-Si-metal contacts enabling 26.1%-efficient POLO-IBC solar
cells. Solar Energy Materials and Solar Cells. 2018;186:184-193.
[https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solmat.2018.06.020](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solmat.2018.06.020)
20. Young DL, Nemeth W, LaSalvia V, et al. Interdigitated back passivated
contact (IBPC) solar cells formed by ion implantation. in IEEE Journal
_of_ _Photovoltaics._ Jan. 2016;6(1):41-47. [https://doi.org/10.1109/](https://doi.org/10.1109/JPHOTOV.2015.2483364)
[JPHOTOV.2015.2483364](https://doi.org/10.1109/JPHOTOV.2015.2483364)
21. Rienäcker M, Merkle A, Römer U, Kohlenberg H, Krügener J,
Brendel R, Peibst R, “Recombination behavior of photolithographyfree back junction back contact solar cells with carrier-selective polysilicon on oxide junctions for both polarities,” Energy Procedia, Volume
[92, August 2016, Pages 412-418, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.egypro.](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.egypro.2016.07.121)
[2016.07.121.](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.egypro.2016.07.121)
22. Reichel C, Müller R, Feldmann F, Richter A, Hermle M, Glunz SW.
Influence of the transition region between p- and n-type polycrystalline silicon passivating contacts on the performance of interdigitated
back contact silicon solar cells editors-pick. J Appl Phys. 2017;122
[(18):184502. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.5004331](https://doi.org/10.1063/1.5004331)


23. Haase F, Kiefer F, Schäfer S, Kruse C, Krügener J, Brendel R, Peibst R,
“Interdigitated back contact solar cells with polycrystalline silicon on
oxide passivating contacts for both polarities,” Jpn J Appl Phys, Part 1
[56, 08MB15, 2017. https://doi.org/10.7567/JJAP.56.08 MB15.](https://doi.org/10.7567/JJAP.56.08)

24. Stodolny M, Lenes M, Wu Y, Janssen G, Romijn I, Luchies J and
Geerligs L, “n-Type polysilicon passivating contact for industrial bifacial n-type solar cells” in 6th International Conference on Silicon Photovoltaics, Chambery, 2016.

25. Tao Y, Upadhyaya V, Chen C-W, et al. Large area tunnel oxide passivated rear contact n-type Si solar cells with 21.2% efficiency. Prog
_[Photovolt: Res Appl. 2016;24:830-835. https://doi.org/10.1002/pip.](https://doi.org/10.1002/pip.2739)_
[2739](https://doi.org/10.1002/pip.2739)
26. Richter A, Benick J, Müller R, et al. Tunnel oxide passivating electron
contacts as full-area rear emitter of high-efficiency p-type silicon
[solar cells. Prog Photovolt Res Appl. 2017;26(8):1-8. https://doi.org/](https://doi.org/10.1002/pip.2960)
[10.1002/pip.2960](https://doi.org/10.1002/pip.2960)

27. Ingenito A, Limodio G, Procel P, et al. Silicon solar cell architecture
with front selective and rear full area ion-implanted passivating con[tacts. Sol RRL. 2017;1:1700040, 6. https://doi.org/10.1002/solr.](https://doi.org/10.1002/solr.201700040)
[201700040](https://doi.org/10.1002/solr.201700040)
28. Feldmann F, Simon M, Bivour M, Reichel C, Hermle M, Glunz SW.
Efficient carrier selective p- and n- contacts for Si solar cells. Solar
_[Energy Materials and Solar Cells. 2014;131:100-104. https://doi.org/](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solmat.2014.05.039)_
[10.1016/j.solmat.2014.05.039](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solmat.2014.05.039)
29. Luxembourg SL, Zhang D, Wu Y, et al. Crystalline silicon solar cell
with front and rear polysilicon passivated contacts as bottom cell for
[hybrid tandems. Energy Procedia. 2017;124:621-627. https://doi.org/](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.egypro.2017.09.091)
[10.1016/j.egypro.2017.09.091](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.egypro.2017.09.091)
30. Stodolny MK, Anker J, Geerligs BLJ, et al. Material properties of
LPCVD processed n-type polysilicon passivating contacts and its
application in PERPoly industrial bifacial solar cells. Energy Procedia.
[2017;124:635-642. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.egypro.2017.09.250](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.egypro.2017.09.250)

31. Duttagupta S, Nandakumar N, Padhamnath P, Kitz Buatis J, Stangl R,
Aberle AG. monoPoly™cells: large-area crystalline silicon solar cells
with fire-through screen printed contact to doped polysilicon sur[faces. Solar Energy Materials and Solar Cells. 2018;187:76-81. https://](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solmat.2018.05.059)
[doi.org/10.1016/j.solmat.2018.05.059](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solmat.2018.05.059)
32. Feldmann F, Nicolai M, Müller R, Reichel C, Hermle M. Optical and
electrical characterization of poly-Si/SiOx contacts and their implications on solar cell design. Energy Procedia. 2017;124:31-37, ISSN
[1876-6102. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.egypro.2017.09.336](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.egypro.2017.09.336)
33. Feldmann F, Reichel C, Müller R, Hermle M. The application of polySi/SiOx contacts as passivated top/rear contacts in Si solar cells. Solar
_Energy Materials and Solar Cells. 2017;159:265-271, ISSN 0927-0248._
[https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solmat.2016.09.015](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solmat.2016.09.015)

34. Baker-Finch SC, McIntosh KR, Yan D, Chern Fong K, Kho TC. Nearinfrared free carrier absorption in heavily doped silicon. J Appl Phys.
[2014;116(6): 1-12, 063106. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4893176](https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4893176)
35. Yang G, Guo P, Procel P, Weeber A, Isabella O, Zeman M. Polycrystalline silicon-oxide films as carrier-selective passivating contacts
[for c-Si solar cells. Appl Phys Lett. 2018;112: 1-5, 193904. https://doi.](https://doi.org/10.1063/1.5027547)
[org/10.1063/1.5027547](https://doi.org/10.1063/1.5027547)

36. Mack I, Stuckelberger J, Wyss P, et al. Properties of mixed phase
silicon-oxide-based passivating contacts for silicon solar cells. Solar
_[Energy Materials and Solar Cells. 2018;181:9-14. https://doi.org/10.](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solmat.2017.12.030)_
[1016/j.solmat.2017.12.030](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solmat.2017.12.030)
37. Nogay G, Stuckelberger J, Wyss P, et al. Silicon-rich silicon carbide
hole-selective rear contacts for crystalline-silicon-based solar cells.
_[ACS Appl Mater Interfaces. 2016;8(51):35660-35667. https://doi.org/](https://doi.org/10.1021/acsami.6b12714)_
[10.1021/acsami.6b12714](https://doi.org/10.1021/acsami.6b12714)
38. Feldmann F, Nogay G, Polzin JI, Steinhauser B, Richter A, Fell A,
Schmiga C, Hermle M, and Glunz SW, A study on the charge carrier
transport of passivating contacts, IEEE J Photo, VOL. 8, NO. 6,


-----

[NOVEMBER 2018, DOI: https://doi.org/10.1109/JPHOTOV.2018.](https://doi.org/10.1109/JPHOTOV.2018.2870735)
[2870735, 1503-1509.](https://doi.org/10.1109/JPHOTOV.2018.2870735)
39. Limodio G, Yang G, Ge H, et al. Front and rear contact Si solar cells
combining high and low thermal budget Si passivating contacts. Solar
_[Energy Materials and Solar Cells. 2019;194:28-35. https://doi.org/10.](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solmat.2019.01.039)_
[1016/j.solmat.2019.01.039](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solmat.2019.01.039)
40. Ingenito A, Nogay G, Stuckelberger J, et al. Phosphorous-doped silicon carbide as front-side full-area passivating contact for double-side
contacted c-Si solar cells. in IEEE Journal of Photovoltaics. March
2019;9(2):346-354. [https://doi.org/10.1109/JPHOTOV.2018.](https://doi.org/10.1109/JPHOTOV.2018.2886234)
[2886234](https://doi.org/10.1109/JPHOTOV.2018.2886234)
41. Santbergen R, Yang G, Procel P, Limodio G, Weeber A, Isabella O, and
Zeman M, “Optical analysis of poly-Si and Poly-SiOx carrier-selective
passivating contacts for c-Si solar cells,” in Light, Energy and the Envi_ronment, OSA Technical Digest (online) (Optical Society of America,_
2017), paper PW3A.5.
42. Schnabel M, van de Loo BWH, Nemeth W, et al. Hydrogen passivation of poly-Si/SiOx contacts for Si solar cells using Al2O3 studied
with deuterium. Appl Phys Lett 2018. 2018;112(20): 1-5, 203901.
[https://doi.org/10.1063/1.5031118](https://doi.org/10.1063/1.5031118)
43. Sinton R, Cuevas A and Stuckings M, “Quasi-steady-state
photoconductance, a new method for solar cell material and device
characterization” in Conference Record of the IEEE Photovoltaic Spe[cialists Conference,1996, DOI: https://doi.org/10.1109/PVSC.1996.](https://doi.org/10.1109/PVSC.1996.564042)
[564042](https://doi.org/10.1109/PVSC.1996.564042)
44. Larionova Y, Turcu M, Reiter S, et al. On the recombination behavior
of p+-type polysilicon on oxide junctions deposited by different
methods on textured and planar surfaces. Phys Status Solidi A.
[August 2017;214(8): 1-5, 1700058. https://doi.org/10.1002/pssa.](https://doi.org/10.1002/pssa.201700058)
[201700058](https://doi.org/10.1002/pssa.201700058)
45. Bivour M, Schröer S, Hermle M, Glunz SW. Silicon heterojunction rear
emitter solar cells: less restrictions on the optoelectrical properties of
front side TCOs. Solar Energy Materials and Solar Cells. 2014;122:120[129. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solmat.2013.11.029](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solmat.2013.11.029)
46. Limodio G, De Groot Y, Van Kuler G, Mazzarella L, Zhao Y, Procel P,
Yang G, Isabella O, Zeman M. Copper plating metallization with alternative seed layers for c-Si solar cells embedding carrier-selective passivating contacts, submitted to IEEE JPV (2019).
[47. https://www.synopsys.com/silicon/tcad.html](https://www.synopsys.com/silicon/tcad.html) (Accessed 12[th]

September 2018)
48. Procel P, Ingenito A, De Rose R, et al. Opto-electrical modelling and
optimization study of a novel IBC c-Si solar cell. Prog Photovol: Res
_[Appl. 2017;25(6):452-469. https://doi.org/10.1002/pip.2874](https://doi.org/10.1002/pip.2874)_
49. Procel P, Yang G, Isabella O, Zeman M. Theoretical evaluation of contact stack for high efficiency IBC-SHJ solar cells. Solar Energy Mate_[rials and Solar Cells. 2018;186:66-77. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solmat.2018.06.021)_
[solmat.2018.06.021](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solmat.2018.06.021)
50. Procel P, Löper P, Crupi F, Ballif C, Ingenito A. Numerical simulations
of hole carrier selective contacts in p-type c-Si solar cells. Solar Energy
_[Materials and Solar Cells. 2019;200: 1-7, 109937. https://doi.org/10.](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solmat.2019.109937)_
[1016/j.solmat.2019.109937](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solmat.2019.109937)
51. Procel P, Löper P, Crupi F, Ballif C, Ingenito A. Numerical simulations
of hole carrier selective contacts in p-type c-Si solar cells. Sol Ener
_[Mat Sol Cells, Vol. 2019;200: 1-7, 109937. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solmat.2019.109937)_
[solmat.2019.109937](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solmat.2019.109937)
52. Santbergen R, Yang G, Procel P, Limodio G, Weeber A, Isabella O, and
Zeman M, “Optical analysis of poly-Si and poly-SiOx carrier-selective
passivating contacts for c-Si solar cells,” in Light, Energy and the
_Environment, OSA Technical Digest (online) (Optical Society of_
America, 2017), paper PW3A.5.
53. Melskens J, van de Loo BWH, Macco B, Black LE, Smit S,
Kessels WMM. Passivating contacts for crystalline silicon solar cells:
from concepts and materials to prospects. IEEE J Photo. March 2018;
[8(2):373-388. https://doi.org/10.1109/JPHOTOV.2018.2797106](https://doi.org/10.1109/JPHOTOV.2018.2797106)


54. Römer U, Peibst R, Ohrdes T, et al. Ion implantation for poly-Si passivated back-junction back-contacted solar cells. IEEE J Photo. 2015;
[5:507-514. https://doi.org/10.1109/JPHOTOV.2014.2382975](https://doi.org/10.1109/JPHOTOV.2014.2382975)
55. Feldmann F, Müller R, Reichel C, Hermle M. Ion implantation into
amorphous Si layers to form carrier-selective contacts for Si solar
[cells. Phys. Status Solidi RRL. 2014;08:767-770. https://doi.org/10.](https://doi.org/10.1002/pssr.201409312)
[1002/pssr.201409312](https://doi.org/10.1002/pssr.201409312)
56. Khan BA, Pandya R. Activation energy of source-drain current in
hydrogenated and unhydrogenated polysilicon thin-film transistors.
_IEEE Trans Elect Dev. 1990;37(7):1727-1734._
57. Peibst R, Larionova Y, Reiter S, et al. Implementation of n[+] _and p[+]_ _poly_
_junctions on front and rear side of double-side contacted industrial silicon_
_solar cells. Munich, Germany: EUPVSEC; 2016._
58. Young DL, Nemeth W, LaSalvia V, Reedy R, Bateman N and
Stradins P, “Ion implanted passivated contacts for interdigitated back
contacted solar cells,” 2015 IEEE 42nd Photovoltaic Specialist
[Conference (PVSC), New Orleans, LA, 2015, pp. 1-5. doi: https://doi.](https://doi.org/10.1109/PVSC.2015.7356141)
[org/10.1109/PVSC.2015.7356141](https://doi.org/10.1109/PVSC.2015.7356141)
59. Feldmann F, Müller R, Reichel C, Hermle M. Ion implantation into
amorphous Si layers to form carrier-selective contacts for Si solar
[cells. Phys. Status Solidi RRL. 2014;08:767-770. https://doi.org/10.](https://doi.org/10.1002/pssr.201409312)
[1002/pssr.201409312](https://doi.org/10.1002/pssr.201409312)
60. Steinkemper H, Feldmann F, Bivour M, Hermle M. Numerical simulation of carrier-selective electron contacts featuring tunnel oxides. in
_[IEEE Journal of Photovoltaics. Sept. 2015;5(5):1348-1356. https://doi.](https://doi.org/10.1109/JPHOTOV.2015.2455346)_
[org/10.1109/JPHOTOV.2015.2455346](https://doi.org/10.1109/JPHOTOV.2015.2455346)
61. Procel P, Löper P, Crupi F, Ballif C, Ingenito A, “Numerical simulations
of hole carrier selective contacts in p-type c-Si solar cells,”
_Solar Energy Materials and Solar Cells, Volume 200, 15 September_
[2019, 1-7, 109937, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solmat.2019.109937.](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solmat.2019.109937)
[62. https://www2.pvlighthouse.com.au/calculators/EDNA%202/EDNA%](https://www2.pvlighthouse.com.au/calculators/EDNA%202/EDNA%202.aspx)
[202.aspx (Accessed 12[th]](https://www2.pvlighthouse.com.au/calculators/EDNA%202/EDNA%202.aspx) September 2018).
63. Reiter S, Koper N, Reineke-Koch R, Larionova Y, Turcu M, Krügener J,
Tetzlaff D, Wietler T, Höhne U, Kähler JD, Brendel R, Peibst R,
“Parasitic absorption in polycrystalline Si-layers for carrier-selective
front junctions,” Energy Procedia, Volume 92, August 2016, Pages
[199-204, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.egypro.2016.07.057.](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.egypro.2016.07.057)
64. Hieslmair H, Latchford I, Mandrell L, Chun M, Adibi B. Ion implantation for silicon solar cells. Photo Int. 2012;18:17-35.
65. Feldmann F, Reichel C, Müller R and Hermle M, “Si solar cells with
top/rear poly-Si contacts,” 2016 IEEE 43rd Photovoltaic Specialists
[Conference (PVSC), Portland, OR, 2016, pp. 2421-2424. https://doi.](https://doi.org/10.1109/PVSC.2016.7750076)
[org/10.1109/PVSC.2016.7750076](https://doi.org/10.1109/PVSC.2016.7750076)
66. Yan D, Cuevas A, Wan Y, Bullock J. Passivating contacts for silicon
solar cells based on boron-diffused recrystallized amorphous silicon
and thin dielectric interlayers. Solar Energy Materials and Solar Cells.
[2016;152:73-79, ISSN 0927-0248. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solmat.](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solmat.2016.03.033)
[2016.03.033](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solmat.2016.03.033)
67. Römer U, Peibst R, Ohrdes T, Lim B, Krügener J, Wietler T, Brendel R.
“Ion implantation for poly-Si passivated back-junction backcontacted solar cells,” in IEEE Journal of Photovoltaics, vol. 5, no. 2,
[pp. 507-514, March 2015. https://doi.org/10.1109/JPHOTOV.2014.](https://doi.org/10.1109/JPHOTOV.2014.2382975)
[2382975](https://doi.org/10.1109/JPHOTOV.2014.2382975)
[68. http://www.tibtech.com/conductivity.php, Properties table of stain-](http://www.tibtech.com/conductivity.php)
less steel, metals and other conductive materials
69. Braun S, Zuschlag A, Raabe B, Hahn G. The Origin of Background
[Plating. Energy Procedia. 2011;8:565-570, ISSN 1876-6102. https://](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.egypro.2011.06.183)
[doi.org/10.1016/j.egypro.2011.06.183](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.egypro.2011.06.183)
70. Rehman A, Lee SH. Review of the potential of the Ni/Cu plating technique for crystalline silicon solar cell. Dent Mater. 2014;7:1318-1341.
[https://doi.org/10.3390/ma7021318](https://doi.org/10.3390/ma7021318)
[71. https://www.nrel.gov/grid/solar-resource/spectra.html](https://www.nrel.gov/grid/solar-resource/spectra.html)
[72. https://patents.google.com/patent/WO2019066648A1/en?](https://patents.google.com/patent/WO2019066648A1/en?inventor=olindo+isabella&oq=olindo+isabella)
[inventor=olindo+isabella&oq=olindo+isabella](https://patents.google.com/patent/WO2019066648A1/en?inventor=olindo+isabella&oq=olindo+isabella)


-----

73. Young DL, LaSalvia V, Nemeth B, Theingi S, Kale A, Findley D,
Atkins J, Page M, Stradins P. Front/back poly-Si/SiO2 passivated contact device with Voc > 720 mV. 35th European Photovoltaic Solar
Energy Conference and Exhibition, 10.4229/35thEUPVSEC
20182018-2AV.3.32.
74. Tutsch L, Feldmann F, Polzin J, et al. Implementing transparent conducting oxides by DC sputtering on ultrathin SiOx/poly-Si passivating
contacts. Solar Energy Materials and Solar Cells. 2019;200:109960, 5.
[https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solmat.2019.109960](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.solmat.2019.109960)
75. Peibst R, Larionova Y, Reiter S, et al. Building blocks for industrial,
screen-printed double-side contacted POLO cells with highly
transparent ZnO:Al layers. in IEEE Journal of Photovoltaics. May 2018;
[8(3):719-725. https://doi.org/10.1109/JPHOTOV.2018.2813427](https://doi.org/10.1109/JPHOTOV.2018.2813427)
76. Wietler TF, Min B, Reiter S, et al. High temperature annealing of ZnO:
Al on passivating POLO junctions: impact on transparency,


conductivity, junction passivation and interface stability. IEEE J Photo.
[2018;9:89-96. https://doi.org/10.1109/JPHOTOV.2018.2878337](https://doi.org/10.1109/JPHOTOV.2018.2878337)
77. Almansouri I, Ho-Baillie A, Bremner SP, and Green MA, Supercharging
silicon solar cell performance by means of multijunction concept, IEEE
_[J Photo, VOL. 5, NO. 3, MAY 2015:968-76, https://doi.org/10.1109/](https://doi.org/10.1109/JPHOTOV.2015.2395140)_
[JPHOTOV.2015.2395140](https://doi.org/10.1109/JPHOTOV.2015.2395140)


**How to cite this article: Limodio G, Yang G, De Groot Y, et al.**

Implantation-based passivating contacts for crystalline silicon

front/rear contacted solar cells. Prog Photovolt Res Appl. 2020;

28:403–416. https://doi.org/10.1002/pip.3250


-----

