[Contents lists available at ScienceDirect](http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/journal/13698001)

## Materials Science in Semiconductor Processing

[journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/mssp](https://www.elsevier.com/locate/mssp)

### Review of advanced hydrogen passivation for high efficient crystalline silicon solar cells

Sang Hee Lee, Muhammad Fahad Bhopal, Doo Won Lee, Soo Hong Lee[⁎]

Green Strategic Energy Research Institute, Department of Electronics Engineering, Sejong University, 98 Gunja-dong, Gwangjin-gu, Seoul 143-747, Republic of Korea


T


A R T I C L E I N F O

Keywords:
Silicon solar cells
Hydrogen
Defect passivation
Minority carrier lifetime
Laser

1. Introduction


A B S T R A C T

Hydrogen passivation, such as forming gas annealing and alneal (aluminum anneal) process, has been investigated for high efficient crystalline silicon solar cell structures, because the hydrogen atoms can reduce the
surface recombination velocity. However, hydrogen could not diffuse deeply to passivate various defects within
the silicon bulk. Further investigations into the properties of hydrogen in the silicon lead to the control of
hydrogen atoms’ charge states for their high diffusivity and reactivity. Also, research of the hydrogenated
amorphous silicon nitride (a-SiNx:H) as a hydrogen source induced an ‘advanced hydrogen passivation’. This
paper provides a review of advanced hydrogen passivation applied on p-type, n-type and upgraded metallurgical
grade crystalline silicon solar cells, respectively. Especially, the regeneration of boron-oxygen related defects,
which cause carrier induced degradation, will be closely discussed since most of industrial solar cells are fabricated by boron-doped p-type silicon wafer. Moreover, laser-induced hydrogen passivation, which can locally
recover defective area on the solar cells, will be addressed. In the conclusion, proper conditions of advanced
hydrogen passivation for the successful improvement of minority carrier lifetime will be summarized.


crystalline silicon [5,9–15]. Moreover, it has been reported that boronoxygen (B-O) complex, which leads to carrier-induced degradation
(CID) in boron doped p-type silicon wafers, can be deactivated effectively by using hydrogen atoms in the silicon nitride layer [16–21].
For effective hydrogen passivation of defects in crystalline silicon,
locally stable charge states of interstitial hydrogen was considered as an
important parameter [22]. Interstitial monatomic hydrogen atoms in
silicon are known to exist in three charge states: positive (H[+]), neutral
(H[0]), and negative (H[-]) [23–25]. Depending on the charge states of
hydrogen atoms, their diffusivities in the doped silicon are different.
Among the three charge states of hydrogen, the diffusivity of H[0] is
substantially higher than the other charge states since it is free from the
charge effects and electric fields in the silicon [26,27]. Consequently,
substantial concentration of the injected hydrogen atoms into silicon
can possibly passivate the defects when the hydrogen has a favorable
charge state for the specific defects [19].
In the next chapter, the general properties of hydrogen in crystalline
silicon, based on the research about charge states of hydrogen, will be
summarized. Afterwards, the paper offers a detailed overview of advanced hydrogen passivation on p-type, n-type and upgraded metallurgical grade (UMG) silicon wafers. Lastly, a laser-induced hydrogen
passivation technique, which can selectively passivate defective region
on the solar cell, will be introduced.


Dominated by crystalline silicon solar cells, photovoltaic industries
have been developed to compete with other energy sources and renewable energy. For a reduction of solar module price per watt peak,
there were many approaches to improve the conversion efficiency of
solar cells without substantial cost increase. In order to improve solar
cell efficiency, passivation of the silicon surface and bulk is a significant
process since the passivation quality decides the minority carrier lifetime. From the integrated circuit fabrication, a hydrogenated amorphous silicon nitride (a-SiNx:H) film, which was deposited by plasma
enhanced chemical vapor deposition (PECVD), was simultaneously
applied to solar cells as a passivation layer and an anti-reflection
coating (ARC) layer [1,2]. The silicon nitride layer, which is usually
processed by reaction of SiH4 and NH3 gas, contains hydrogen atoms
that could not free from the silicon substrate during the deposition [3].
Hence, many solar cell researchers have been interested in releasing the
hydrogen atoms from the silicon nitride layer to enhance the passivation quality since the beneficial interaction of hydrogen with dangling
bond have been widely studied from the early 1970s [4–8].
To date, it has been well known that hydrogen can passivate various
defects such as crystallographic defects in multi-crystalline silicon (mcSi), metal impurities, laser-induced defects and the surfaces of

⁎ Corresponding author.
[E-mail address: shl@sejong.ac.kr (S.H. Lee).](mailto:shl@sejong.ac.kr)


[https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mssp.2018.01.019](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mssp.2018.01.019)
Received 22 November 2017; Received in revised form 8 January 2018; Accepted 27 January 2018Availableonline20February2018

1369-8001/©2018ElsevierLtdAllrightsreserved


-----

Fig. 1. (a) Donor and acceptor level of hydrogen in silicon band gap. (b) The fractional hydrogen concentration of each charge states as a function of Fermi level at 423 K [22].


2. Properties of hydrogen in crystalline silicon

As mentioned in the introduction, interstitial hydrogen atoms can
exist in three charge states depending on the number of electrons they
have. Accordingly, each state of hydrogens is favorable to interact with
the specific charge state of the defects in the silicon. For example, the
negative charge state of hydrogens can neutralize phosphorous dopant
atoms or positively-charged transition metal impurities [28–30]. Conversely, boron acceptors and negatively-charged transition metal impurities can be neutralized by the positive charge state of hydrogens

[31]. Also, the neutralized dopants can be electrically re-activated by
the other charge states of hydrogens. Hence, controlling the concentration of specific charge state of hydrogens is important for passivating defects.
The relative hydrogen concentration of specific charge state is
dominated by the location of Fermi level relative to the donor and
acceptor level of hydrogen [32]. Herring et al. reported that the hydrogen donor level is located 0.16 eV under the conduction band and
the acceptor level is located about 0.07 eV below the middle of band
gap (Fig. 1(a)) [22]. Since the donor level is above the acceptor level,
the H[0] is never stable and pairs of them easily transfer an electron from
one to the other [33]. As Fig. 1(b) shows, there is a dominant charge
state of hydrogen for both n and p type silicon, respectively. Especially,
the H[0] is always a minority charge state of hydrogen although it has
advantages for efficient defect passivation. The main benefit of the H[0] is
that the diffusivity is five orders magnitude higher than the other
charge states since it is not influenced by a fixed charge and electric
field inside of silicon [23,28,34,35]. Also, it has high reactivity due to a
free electron, which can be given to other defects or obtain another
electron for bonding. However, the H[0] maintains stability for the order
of nanoseconds and then auto-ionizes to the H[+] in the p-type silicon at
room temperature [22]. Therefore, maintaining a favorable condition
for the H[0] generation is required for the great level of defect passivation.
In order to achieve high H[0] concentration, a tempering process can
be used since the changed Fermi energy closer to the mid-bandgap can
increase the fractional H[0] concentration. Also, an injection of excess
carrier from an illumination source can increase the H[0] concentration
by converting the Fermi energy into the quasi-Fermi energy. For these
reasons, P. Hamer et al. researched the manipulation of minority hydrogen charge states, which was predicted by modeling of the fractional
H[0] concentration by combining the temperature conditions and excess
carrier densities [33]. The simulated fractional concentration of H[0]

showed that there is a maximum point of H[0] concentration at different


temperatures depending on each excess carrier density. They compared
the simulated data with an effective lifetime data from UMG silicon
wafers which were hydrogenated at various annealing temperatures
under illumination. Above 550 K of process temperature, the effective
lifetime trend matched the simulated H[0] concentration trend. The experimental results showed that controlling the charge state of hydrogen
for achieving maximum H[0] concentration is a significant technique
even though the data trend mismatched a simulation under 550 K of
annealing conditions due to the other types of defects.

3. Advanced hydrogen passivation

3.1. From conventional hydrogen passivation to advanced hydrogen
passivation

Initially, hydrogen passivation focused on the reduction of surface
recombination velocity. Among the successful techniques for using
hydrogen, forming gas annealing (FGA) was considered one of the costeffective ways to improve silicon surface quality. FGA is usually conducted at around 400–450 °C for 5–30 min in a furnace.
The application of conventional passivation with atomic hydrogen
was called the ‘alneal’ (aluminum anneal) process [36–38]. As the
process name implies, an aluminum layer is deposited on the thermally
grown SiO2 layer followed by annealing at around 370–400 °C for
30 min in the dark. It is assumed that the atomic hydrogens are generated during this process as by-products of the reaction between aluminum and hydroxyl ions within the SiO2 [38]. Then the atomic hydrogen diffuses to the Si-SiO2 interface and passivate dangling bond.
After the process, the aluminum on the light receiving face side can be
removed by phosphoric acid. By applying this technique, J. Zhao et al.
reported substantial improvement in the effective minority carrier
lifetime (τeff) in various types of wafer and recorded high-efficiency
solar cells with passivated emitter, rear locally diffused (PERL) and
passivated emitter, rear totally diffused (PERT) structures [39,40].
A great difference in the conventional hydrogen passivation and
‘advanced hydrogen passivation’ is controlling the charge state of hydrogen atoms to maximize the passivation effect. As already mentioned
in the previous chapter, shifting the Fermi energy by using thermal
energy and illumination can increase the concentration of the favorable
charge states of hydrogen atoms. Below this section, details of parameters and conditions, which can influence the advanced hydrogen for
the each type of silicon wafer, will be addressed.


-----

3.2. Advanced hydrogen passivation for p-type silicon wafers

Since the 1970s, minority carrier lifetime of boron doped silicon
material which contains high oxygen contents was asymptotically degraded under carrier injection (illumination or bias) due to the adverse
influence of B-O related defects [41–47]. This CID of solar cells decrease
the short-circuit current and the open-circuit voltage [48]. As a result,
about 2% of the absolute conversion efficiency can be decreased by the
CID in highly boron doped (ND > 10[16] cm[−][3]) oxygen rich silicon under
typical working conditions of solar cells [49].
Although the mechanism of CID is still not clear, the current understanding of CID is that the energy from the recombination of the
injected minority carrier enhances the diffusion of the oxygen dimer
(O2i) and it binds to the substitutional boron atom (Bs) [50–52]. As a
result of the recombination enhanced process, the BsO2i complex formation occurs at room temperature with an injected carrier and produces recombination trap sites of minority carriers. The BsO2i can be
dissociated by annealing in the dark at temperature above 170 °C and
then, the minority carrier lifetime is recovered [53]. However, the
annealed state is not stable since the Bs and O2i are still present in the
silicon and can form the B-O complex again under the minority carrier
injection [53].

3.2.1. Regeneration reaction and the role of hydrogen
In order to keep the inactive state of B-O complex, a ‘regeneration
reaction’ has been reported by Herguth et al. [49,54]. The regeneration
reaction transforms the degraded state of B-O complex into the regenerated state, which is stable under carrier injection [55]. Accordingly, the three state model of B-O complex was introduced, as in Fig. 2
shows the requirements and the typical temperature conditions to
transform of each states [20,56].
Meanwhile, it has been reported that hydrogen in the silicon bulk
acts as a significant factor for regeneration of B-O defects. Wilking et al.
has shown that a high enough concentration of hydrogen in the silicon
bulk is necessary to bring about the regenerate process by applying a
cyclic hydrogenation procedure. [57,58]. Each cycle of hydrogenation
consists of two steps. First, samples are exposed in a remote hydrogen
plasma using microwave-induced remote hydrogen plasma (MIRHP)
reactor to passivate boron atoms near the surface with the hydrogen.
Second, annealing in nitrogen atmosphere releases hydrogen from the
boron atoms. After the regeneration process, the minority carrier lifetime of the samples were compared by increasing the number of cyclic
hydrogenation. As a result, the lifetime of the samples were logarithmically increased with more cycle of the hydrogenation process.
However, the reaction rate of regeneration can be slowed down by
factors such as boron, interstitial oxygen, thermal donors, or metal

Fig. 2. Transition between three states model of B-O defect and required conditions for
each transition.


impurities [59–61]. These impurities are known to be traps for atomic
hydrogen and take the possibility of a B-O defect passivation [62]. For
this reason, the best condition for a regeneration reaction can be
achieved when there is a high enough concentration of mobile atomic
hydrogen in a silicon wafer containing a limited concentration of other
impurities.

3.2.2. Role of an a-SiNx:H layer and following annealing process for the
regeneration
Although the cyclic hydrogenation procedure clearly showed the
role of hydrogen in the regeneration reaction, it is not an effective
method for application in industries. For this reason, an a-SiNx:H layer
has been researched since it is known as a hydrogenation source to
passivate multi-crystalline silicon after the high temperature firing step

[63,64]. By using this principle, it was reported that the regeneration
rate was increased as the peak firing temperature increased [65]. The
Fourier-transformed infrared (FTIR) measurement revealed that the
higher peak temperature of firing transfers more hydrogen from the
SiNx:H layers into the silicon. Also, Münzer et al. again proved the role
of hydrogen by observing that a silicon nitride layer, which was deposited without containing hydrogen by low pressure chemical vapor
deposition (LPCVD), showed no improvement of minority carrier lifetime after regeneration [16].
Reversely, hydrogen can be effused from the silicon during the
cooling step of firing [7,65–69]. At high peak temperature of firing
above 750 °C, a faster cooling rate increased the regeneration rate due
to the limited effusion of hydrogen from the silicon bulk. In addition,
the regeneration rate was influenced by the amount of injected hydrogen when the peak temperature was below 750 °C. Fig. 3 depicts an
example of the samples which were fired at 750 °C with different belt
speed of furnace [65]. Fig. 3(a) is a reference sample which has ten
hydrogen atoms in the SiNx:H layer. Fig. 3(b–d) shows the injection of
hydrogen at peak temperature of firing, while Fig. 3(e–g) shows the
respective effusion of hydrogen during the cooling. Even though the
sample in Fig. 3(d), (g) had a lesser amount of hydrogen effusion due to
the fast cooling rate, sample in Fig. 3(c), (f) had more amount of hydrogen, since there were more injected hydrogen atoms at peak temperature of firing.
When there is enough hydrogen concentration in the silicon bulk by
applying optimized firing process, additional mid-temperature steps are
known to influence the following regeneration process [20]. The annealing steps in the mid-temperature range (100 – 400 °C) for 15 min
resulted in the maximum regeneration rate at ~ 230 °C. Above this
temperature, regeneration started to decrease sharply and no regeneration occurred anymore near at 400 °C. The mechanism of this
result, which is suggested by McQuaid et al., is that the thermal energy
redistributed the hydrogen to the preferred bound state depending on
the temperature. Such hydrogen start to forms boron-hydrogen (B-H)
pairs at around 170 °C. However, at higher temperature above 380 °C,
hydrogen is bound in H2 molecules instead of the B-H pairs. H2 molecules are not easily dissociated under regeneration condition due to
their high stability compared to the B-H pairs. For this reason, the B-H
pairs can produce more mobile hydrogen atoms in the silicon bulk,
which are favorable for the following regeneration process.

3.2.3. Acceleration of the regeneration rate
As Fig. 2 shows, the states of B-O defects are determined by the
reaction rate of four transitions (annealing, degradation, regeneration,
and destabilization). In order to decrease the duration of hydrogen
passivation, the acceleration of the regeneration rate is required. The
regeneration reaction can outweigh the other reactions during the
process by controlling the intensity of illumination since the other
transition reactions are only controlled by temperature. For these reasons, Wilking et al. regenerated samples with 2.7 sun intensity illumination at varied temperatures (120–400 °C) [20]. The experimental
results showed that high intensity illumination decreased complete


-----

Fig. 3. Example of hydrogen amount in the silicon (numbers under each sample figure) when the samples were fired at 750 °C with different belt speed (gray color of figure is silicon and
dark blue color is SiNx:H). Each figure shows samples (a) before firing, (b–d) hydrogen injection with varied time at peak temperature of firing, (e–g) hydrogen effusion with varied the
cooling rate.


regeneration time up to 10 s at ~ 200 °C. Above 230 °C, the defect
concentration after regeneration increased since the destabilization
started to be dominant reaction. Also, D. C. Walter et al. reported few
milliseconds of τeff on the boron-doped Czochralski (CZ) silicon wafer
by applying the mid-temperature annealing (250 °C) for 10 min in the
dark followed by regeneration at 230 °C with 2.45 sun [70]. By applying the accelerated regeneration, complete deactivation of the B-O
defect was achieved only after 5 s process duration. According to these
results, it is clearly shown that the acceleration of complete regeneration of B-O defects is possible by increasing the illumination intensity
with proper range of temperature.
In order to apply the accelerated regeneration process on the industry, a production scale inline regenerator (C.REG 6.200), which allows 40 s of regeneration in a single pass, was designed by Centrotherm

[71,72]. Samples which were regenerated by this production scale tool,
resulted in no degradation of open circuit voltage (Voc) after stability
test (0.1 suns, 40 °C and 48 h), though the loss of the short circuit
current and the fill factor were inevitable. Also, it was reported that
theτeff after regeneration process can be limited by the high surface
recombination velocity due to the passivation damage, such as scratches from the metal belt within the furnace. However, scratches on the
passivation layer will be restricted when the rear side is fully metallized.

3.2.4. Impact of plasma exposure and passivation stacks
Lim et al. suggested that plasma exposure is an important factor for
higher hydrogen diffusion rather than the concentration of hydrogen in
the silicon nitride layer since the samples with an aluminum oxide
layer, which was deposited by plasma-assisted atomic layer deposition
(PA-ALD), were regenerated [73]. They assumed that exposure to the
plasma during the deposition could either increase the amount of hydrogen in the dielectric layer or enhance the diffusion of hydrogen into
the silicon bulk.
Afterwards, the role of exposure to the plasma was studied further
to confirm that if the plasma can solely effect on the regeneration
process [74]. Samples exposed to the plasma during the silicon nitride
PECVD without subsequent firing process did not show stable recovery
of bulk lifetime (τbulk). Also, no recovery was observed when the silicon
nitride layer was removed before firing. According to these results, it
turned out that the regeneration process is not simply due to the conjunction of prior plasma exposure and firing but the wafer should be


fired with the hydrogenated silicon nitride present.
When the surface passivation is composed of two layers, which is
generally used by passivated emitter and rear cell (PERC), thin aluminum oxide (Al2O3) or silicon dioxide (SiO2) layer between silicon and
SiNx:H can affect positively on the regeneration due to the increased
surface passivation quality [55]. In the case of these interlayers, even
though it is not significantly involved in the diffusion of hydrogen, it
helps to enhance the injection level during the regeneration step.
However, it was reported that when the thickness of Al2O3 was out of
range (8–14 nm), it acted as a barrier of the hydrogen diffusion [57,75].

3.3. Advanced hydrogen passivation for n-type silicon wafers

Phosphorus doped n-type silicon substrates have been used for developing higher efficiency solar cells since it is beneficial for the CID
and the interstitial Fe, which is a common impurity [76,77]. Nevertheless, it is reported that n-type based solar cells also require great τbulk
above 1 millisecond (ms) for the production of a heterojunction silicon
with intrinsic thin layer (HIT) solar cell with the Voc over 700 mV [78].
As a limitation of high bulk lifetime, oxygen precipitates, which grew
within wafers during the high temperature process such as emitter
diffusion and oxidation, are one of the reasons reducing the absolute
efficiency around 3–5% [79,80]. In order to eliminate oxygen precipitates, a process called ‘tabula rasa’ has been applied to dissolve the
oxygen precipitate nuclei [81,82]. Also, phosphorus gettering can reduce the recombination activity of the oxygen precipitates, which is
combined with metallic impurities [83].
Compared to these processes that require high temperature, hydrogen passivation is more beneficial due to the lower process temperature. In order to achieve the high τbulk, influence of advanced hydrogen passivation on the oxygen precipitates has been studied [84,85].
1-sun implied open circuit voltage (iVoc) mapping clearly revealed that
the ring like patterns of oxygen precipitates on the center of wafers
were totally recovered after the advanced hydrogenation improving
iVoc around 50 mV. Moreover, defect-rich n-type CZ wafers, which were
deposited by hydrogenated silicon oxynitride (SiOxNy:H), showed significant improvement of τbulk from 87 − 190 μs to 3.4 − 4.9 ms. In
particular, the injection-level dependence of the τeff was removed,
which means that the SRH recombination centers were passivated.


-----

3.4. Advanced hydrogen passivation for UMG silicon wafers

Even though UMG silicon wafers have lower quality compared to
the electronic grade silicon wafers, it has been evaluated as a potential
low cost material for the solar cell fabrication [86–92]. However, the
UMG silicon wafers typically contain a relatively high concentration of
impurities such as boron, aluminum and phosphorous since the UMG
silicon feedstock is purified by a liquid phase purification process

[93,94]. For these reasons, passivation of B-O complex in both a n- and
a p-type UMG silicon wafer is a significant process if the wafers contain
enough concentration of oxygen [95–99]. B. J. Hallam et al. showed
that advanced hydrogen passivation can improve minority carrier lifetime of compensated boron doped p-type CZ wafers [19,100]. The advanced hydrogen passivation was applied on UMG silicon wafers by
using a firing belt furnace as a heating source to reach around 620 °C for
2 s and an illumination source simultaneously. The impact of hydrogen
passivation on UMG wafers were greatly dependent on the position of
the wafer within the ingot due to the different dopant densities. Wafers
from the bottom of the ingot showed significant τbulk improvement
(from 8 μs to 550 μs) after hydrogen passivation. Therefore, theoretical
calculation of fractional hydrogen concentration (H[0], H[-]) in various
effective doping densities (NEFF) showed that the H[0] concentration was
reduced with high NEFF, especially at lower temperature. Accordingly,
the bottom part of ingot, which has lower NEFF due to the compensation, could obtain more minority charge state of hydrogen atoms.

3.5. Laser-induced hydrogen passivation

Laser technology has been broadly applied in solar cell fabrication
such as edge junction isolation, groove formation for buried contacts,
selective doping, texturing and ablation of dielectric layers [101–105].
Recently, an application of laser for the hydrogen passivation has been
researched since laser has thermal and radiation energy simultaneously.
Lasers can contribute to the hydrogen passivation of the local area of
cells. Hydrogen passivation using a belt furnace will dehydrogenate
some regions on the cells where it had initially high lifetime. However,
laser-induced hydrogen passivation is beneficial for recovering only the
defective area. This property of laser-induced hydrogenation is significantly valuable since the hydrogenation quality can be degraded
again by temperature steps subsequent to hydrogenation [106–108].
Song et al. reported the influence of laser processing parameters on
the samples that were passivated by SiNx:H on both sides [109]. In the
case of laser power densities, as much as the laser does not break wafers, higher power density improved the τeff of samples. Also, photoluminescence (PL) image showed that the laser illuminated region was
locally passivated. Regarding the scan speed of laser, which were varied
from 0.5 to 3.5 mm/s, the hydrogenation effect on the scanned area was
increased as the scan speed became slower since the sample had longer
time to passivate defects with hydrogen. Substrate temperature conditions, which were controlled by hot plate, also showed differences in
hydrogenation amount. At higher temperatures of substrate, lifetime
showed more enhancement since hydrogen has much faster diffusivity
and is bound with defect rapidly. However, hydrogenation, which was
the result of substrate heating, outweighed the laser-induced hydrogenation. As a result, the PL response image revealed that there was no
evident brightness improvement in a specific region.
As the cooling rate of the firing step needs to be fast to leave more of
a hydrogen amount inside of silicon, the cooling rate after the laserinduced hydrogenation should be controlled properly. Samples that
were located on the heated hot plate after laser illumination resulted in
a poor PL response due to the slower cooling rate compared to the
samples that were off the hot plate [110]. For this reason, a high
cooling rate is required after laser illumination to prevent subsequent
dissociation of hydrogen-defect complexes. In addition, the effects of
the laser-induced hydrogenation also can be stronger by a pre-firing
step at high temperature since the samples can obtain more hydrogen


atoms to be controlled by laser illumination.
For effective laser-induced hydrogenation, the decision of the laser
wavelength is also one of important parameters. Hamer et al. reported
that illumination with a long wavelength laser was more suitable for
the hydrogenation [111]. Samples illuminated with an 808 nm wavelength achieved comparably higher effective lifetime results than
samples at 660 nm wavelength. According to their research, there are
three major advantages that long wavelength illumination is suitable
for the laser-induced hydrogen passivation. First, long wavelength light
can generate carriers that are more uniform throughout the bulk.
Especially, this property is beneficial to wafers that have non-uniform
defect distribution. The second benefit is the reduction of excess energy
loss as heat. If the photon generation efficiency is same between different wavelengths of light, the long wavelength light will require less
energy process to excite greater carrier concentration. The other benefit
comes from reduced irradiation on the wafer due to the long wavelength. The reduced irradiation decreases heat gain which can make the
process easy to control the temperature profile. Better temperature
control can have substantial importance since the charge state control
of hydrogen depends on the cooling rate after high temperature process

[33].
By using the laser technique, hydrogen passivation was applied on
completed cast-monocrystalline silicon solar cells [74,110]. The cell
performance was substantially improved after laser-induced hydrogenation. Compared to the reference cell, the hydrogenated cell had
0.61% higher conversion efficiency which was mainly contributed by
the 12 mV higher Voc. The enhanced spatial internal quantum efficiency
map, which was conducted by a long wave length (981 nm) laser,
showed that the Voc gain was mostly obtained by passivation of dislocation clusters in the bulk side. Accordingly, it is obvious that laserinduced hydrogen passivation is a powerful technique for the high efficient solar cell fabrication.

4. Conclusion

This article reviews the advanced hydrogen passivation based on the
controlling of charge states of hydrogens. Many researchers proved that
advanced hydrogen passivation enhances minority carrier lifetime by
neutralizing various defects in the silicon bulk. However, optimized
hydrogenation process is required to be stable from the subsequent
thermal process. For these reason, key points for the great hydrogenation are summarized below.

# • [In order to di][ff][use a large amount of hydrogen concentration, high]
temperature tempering process (by using belt furnace or laser
scanning) with a-SiN:H is required.

# • [If the silicon wafer contains enough hydrogen concentration by]
optimized hydrogen diffusion process, additional mid-temperature
annealing (~ 230 °C) can enhance the regeneration effect due to B-H
pair formation.

# • [The cooling rate after the tempering process should be fast to pre-]
vent hydrogen effusion from the silicon.

# • [Acceleration of complete regeneration process can be achieved by]
increasing illumination intensity with proper range of temperature
which is dominated by regeneration reaction.

# • [In case of laser-induced hydrogen passivation, higher power density]
is beneficial as much as the wafer does not break. Also, longer wavelength of the laser is easy to control temperature profile.

According to the advantages of advanced hydrogen passivation,
efficiency and reliability of the various types of solar cells will be
substantially improved. In particular, p-type multi-crystalline silicon
solar cells, which shares over 60% in the wafer market, have a big
possibility to change an overall R&D direction in the PV industries

[112]. Also, UMG silicon is given more potential as another low quality
silicon substrate when the portion of substrate cost further increases


-----

Moreover, advanced hydrogen passivation is suitable for combining
with a Ni/Cu-plated contact since an annealing process for the nickel
silicide formation can be carried out simultaneously during the hydrogenation process. In case of the laser-induced hydrogen passivation
technique, it is valuable for passivating only the defective area on the
cells after sorting process of fabrication. According to this high potential, it is possible to expect that instruments for the advanced hydrogen
passivation will be more developed and will spread out quickly to the
industries in the future for maintaining international competitiveness.

Acknowledgment

This work was supported by the Korea Institute of Energy
Technology Evaluation and Planning (KETEP) and the Ministry of
Trade, Industry & Energy (MOTIE) of the Republic of Korea (No.
20173010012940) and by the Ministry of Trade, Industry, and Energy,
Korea Evaluation Institute of Industrial Technology (KEIT) (No.
10043793).

References

[[1] H. Dun, P. Pan, F.R. White, R.W. Douse, Mechanisms of plasma‐enhanced silicon](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref1)
[nitride deposition using SiH4/N2 mixture, J. Electrochem. Soc. 128 (7) (1981)](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref1)
[1555–1563.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref1)

[[2] A. El Amrani, A. Bekhtari, A. El Kechai, H. Menari, L. Mahiou, M. Maoudj, Efficient](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref2)
[passivation of solar cells by silicon nitride, Vacuum 120 (2015) 95–99.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref2)

[[3] H. Mackel, R. Ludemann, Detailed study of the composition of hydrogenated SiNx](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref3)
[layers for high-quality silicon surface passivation, J. Appl. Phys. 92 (5) (2002)](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref3)
[2602–2609.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref3)

[[4] G. Connell, J. Pawlik, Use of hydrogenation in structural and electronic studies of](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref4)
[gap states in amorphous germanium, Phys. Rev. B 13 (2) (1976) 787.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref4)

[[5] A.G. Aberle, Overview on SiN surface passivation of crystalline silicon solar cells,](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref5)
[Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells 65 (1) (2001) 239–248.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref5)

[[6] F. Jiang, M. Stavola, A. Rohatgi, D. Kim, J. Holt, H. Atwater, J. Kalejs,](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref6)
[Hydrogenation of Si from SiNx (H) films: characterization of H introduced into the](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref6)
[Si, Appl. Phys. Lett. 83 (5) (2003) 931–933.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref6)

[[7] M. Sheoran, D.S. Kim, A. Rohatgi, H. Dekkers, G. Beaucarne, M. Young, S. Asher,](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref7)
[Hydrogen diffusion in silicon from plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposited](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref7)
[silicon nitride film at high temperature, Appl. Phys. Lett. 92 (17) (2008) 172107.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref7)

[[8] W. Paul, A. Lewis, G. Connell, T. Moustakas, Doping, Schottky barrier and p-n](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref8)
[junction formation in amorphous germanium and silicon by rf sputtering, Solid](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref8)
[State Commun. 20 (10) (1976) 969–972.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref8)

[[9] J. Benton, C. Doherty, S. Ferris, D. Flamm, L. Kimerling, H. Leamy, Hydrogen](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref9)
[passivation of point defects in silicon, Appl. Phys. Lett. 36 (8) (1980) 670–671.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref9)

[[10] C. Seager, D. Ginley, Studies of the hydrogen passivation of silicon grain bound-](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref10)
[aries, J. Appl. Phys. 52 (2) (1981) 1050–1055.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref10)

[[11] F. Duerinckx, J. Szlufcik, Defect passivation of industrial multicrystalline solar](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref11)
[cells based on PECVD silicon nitride, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells 72 (1) (2002)](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref11)
[231–246.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref11)

[[12] A. Istratov, T. Buonassisi, M. Pickett, M. Heuer, E. Weber, Control of metal im-](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref12)
[purities in “dirty” multicrystalline silicon for solar cells, Mater. Sci. Eng.: B 134 (2)](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref12)
[(2006) 282–286.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref12)

[[13] M. Rinio, A. Yodyungyong, S. Keipert‐Colberg, D. Borchert,](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref13)
[A. Montesdeoca‐Santana, Recombination in ingot cast silicon solar cells, Phys.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref13)
[Status Solidi (A) 208 (4) (2011) 760–768.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref13)

[[14] D. Kohler, A. Zuschlag, G. Hahn, On the origin and formation of large defect](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref14)
[clusters in multicrystalline silicon solar cells, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells 120](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref14)
[(2014) 275–281.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref14)

[15] B. Hallam, A. Sugianto, L. Mai, G. Xu, C. Chan, M. Abbott, S. Wenham, A. Uruena,
M. Aleman, J. Poortmans, Hydrogen passivation of laser-induced defects for silicon solar cells, 2014 IEEE in: Proceedings of the 40th Photovoltaic Specialist
Conference (PVSC), IEEE, 2014, pp. 2476–2480.

[16] K.A. Münzer, Hydrogenated silicon nitride for regeneration of light induced degradation, in: Proceedings of the 24th European Photovoltaic Solar Energy
Conference, Hamburg, Germany, 2009.

[[17] G. Krugel, W. Wolke, J. Geilker, S. Rein, R. Preu, Impact of hydrogen concentra-](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref15)
[tion on the regeneration of light induced degradation, Energy Procedia 8 (2011)](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref15)
[47–51.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref15)

[18] S. Dubois, F. Tanay, J. Veirman, The BOLID project: suppression of the boronoxygen related light-induced-degradation. presentation–main results, in:
Proceedings of the 27th European Photovoltaic Solar Energy Conference and
Exhibition, Frankfurt, 2012.

[[19] B.J. Hallam, S.R. Wenham, P.G. Hamer, M.D. Abbott, A. Sugianto, C.E. Chan,](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref16)
[A.M. Wenham, M.G. Eadie, G. Xu, Hydrogen passivation of BO defects in](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref16)
[Czochralski silicon, Energy Procedia 38 (2013) 561–570.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref16)

[[20] S. Wilking, C. Beckh, S. Ebert, A. Herguth, G. Hahn, Influence of bound hydrogen](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref17)
[states on BO-regeneration kinetics and consequences for high-speed regeneration](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref17)
[processes, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells 131 (2014) 2–8.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref17)

[[21] N. Nampalli, B. Hallam, C. Chan, M. Abbott, S. Wenham, Evidence for the role of](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref18)


[hydrogen in the stabilization of minority carrier lifetime in boron-doped](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref18)
[Czochralski silicon, Appl. Phys. Lett. 106 (17) (2015) 173501.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref18)

[[22] C. Herring, N. Johnson, C.G. Van de Walle, Energy levels of isolated interstitial](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref19)
[hydrogen in silicon, Phys. Rev. B 64 (12) (2001) 125209.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref19)

[[23] C. Seager, R. Anderson, Real‐time observations of hydrogen drift and diffusion in](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref20)
[silicon, Appl. Phys. Lett. 53 (13) (1988) 1181–1183.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref20)

[[24] J. Zhu, N. Johnson, C. Herring, Negative-charge state of hydrogen in silicon, Phys.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref21)
[Rev. B 41 (17) (1990) 12354.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref21)

[[25] D. Mathiot, Modeling of hydrogen diffusion in n-and p-type silicon, Phys. Rev. B](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref22)
[40 (8) (1989) 5867.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref22)

[[26] R. Rizk, P. De Mierry, D. Ballutaud, M. Aucouturier, D. Mathiot, Hydrogen dif-](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref23)
[fusion and passivation processes in p-and n-type crystalline silicon, Phys. Rev. B](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref23)
[44 (12) (1991) 6141.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref23)

[[27] R. Job, W. Fahrner, N. Kazuchits, A. Ulyashin, A two-step low-temperature process](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref24)
[for a pn junction formation due to hydrogen enhanced thermal donor formation in](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref24)
[p-type Czochralski silicon, MRS Proc. (1998) 337.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref24)

[[28] N. Johnson, C. Herring, D. Chadi, Interstitial hydrogen and neutralization of](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref25)
[shallow-donor impurities in single-crystal silicon, Phys. Rev. Lett. 56 (7) (1986)](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref25)
[769.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref25)

[[29] A. Liu, C. Sun, D. Macdonald, Hydrogen passivation of interstitial iron in boron-](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref26)
[doped multicrystalline silicon during annealing, J. Appl. Phys. 116 (19) (2014)](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref26)
[194902.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref26)

[[30] C. Sun, A. Liu, S.P. Phang, F.E. Rougieux, D. Macdonald, Charge states of the](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref27)
[reactants in the hydrogen passivation of interstitial iron in P-type crystalline si-](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref27)
[licon, J. Appl. Phys. 118 (8) (2015) 085709.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref27)

[[31] J. Pankove, D. Carlson, J. Berkeyheiser, R. Wance, Neutralization of shallow ac-](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref28)
[ceptor levels in silicon by atomic hydrogen, Phys. Rev. Lett. 51 (24) (1983) 2224.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref28)

[32] P. Hamer, B. Hallam, C. Chan, A. Wenham, A. Sugianto, M. Abbott, S. Wenham,
Hydrogen passivation mechanisms in silicon solar cells, in: Proceedings of the 28th
European Photovoltaic Solar Energy Conference, Paris, 2013, pp. 982–987.

[[33] P. Hamer, B. Hallam, S. Wenham, M. Abbott, Manipulation of hydrogen charge](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref29)
[states for passivation of P-type wafers in photovoltaics, IEEE J. Photovolt. 4 (5)](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref29)
[(2014) 1252–1260.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref29)

[[34] B. Sopori, Y. Zhang, N. Ravindra, Silicon device processing in H-ambients: h-dif-](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref30)
[fusion mechanisms and influence on electronic properties, J. Electron. Mater. 30](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref30)
[(12) (2001) 1616–1627.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref30)

[[35] M. Capizzi, A. Mittiga, Hydrogen in crystalline silicon: a deep donor? Appl. Phys.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref31)
[Lett. 50 (14) (1987) 918–920.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref31)

[[36] P. Balk, The Si-SiO2 system, Mater. Sci. Monogr. 32 (1988).](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref32)

[[37] R. King, R. Sinton, R. Swanson, Studies of diffused phosphorus emitters: saturation](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref33)
[current, surface recombination velocity, and quantum efficiency, IEEE Trans.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref33)
[Electron Devices 37 (2) (1990) 365–371.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref33)

[[38] J. Zhao, A. Wang, P.P. Altermatt, S.R. Wenham, M.A. Green, 24% efficient perl](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref34)
[silicon solar cell: recent improvements in high efficiency silicon cell research, Sol.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref34)
[Energy Mater. Sol. Cells 41 (1996) 87–99.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref34)

[[39] J. Zhao, Recent advances of high-efficiency single crystalline silicon solar cells in](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref35)
[processing technologies and substrate materials, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells 82](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref35)
[(1) (2004) 53–64.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref35)

[[40] J. Zhao, A. Wang, M.A. Green, 24.5% efficiency PERT silicon solar cells on SEH](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref36)
[MCZ substrates and cell performance on other SEH CZ and FZ substrates, Sol.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref36)
[Energy Mater. Sol. Cells 66 (1) (2001) 27–36.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref36)

[41] H. Fischer, W. Pschunder, Investigation of photon and thermal induced changes in
silicon solar cells, in: Proceedings of the Photovoltaic Specialists Conference, 10
th, Palo Alto, Calif, 1974, pp. 404–411.

[[42] V. Weizer, H. Brandhorst, J. Broder, R. Hart, J. Lamneck, Photon‐degradation](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref37)
[effects in terrestrial silicon solar cells, J. Appl. Phys. 50 (6) (1979) 4443–4449.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref37)

[43] J. Knobloch, S. Glunz, D. Biro, W. Warta, E. Schaffer, W. Wettling, Solar cells with
efficiencies above 21% processed from Czochralski grown silicon, in: proceedings
of the Photovoltaic Specialists Conference, 1996, Conference Record of the Twenty
Fifth IEEE, IEEE, 1996, pp. 405–408.

[[44] J. Schmidt, A.G. Aberle, Accurate method for the determination of bulk minority-](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref38)
[carrier lifetimes of mono-and multicrystalline silicon wafers, J. Appl. Phys. 81 (9)](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref38)
[(1997) 6186–6199.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref38)

[[45] S. Dubois, N. Enjalbert, J. Garandet, Slow down of the light-induced-degradation](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref39)
[in compensated solar-grade multicrystalline silicon, Appl. Phys. Lett. 93 (10)](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref39)
[(2008) 103510.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref39)

[[46] M. Forster, E. Fourmond, F. Rougieux, A. Cuevas, R. Gotoh, K. Fujiwara, S. Uda,](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref40)
[M. Lemiti, Boron-oxygen defect in Czochralski-silicon co-doped with gallium and](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref40)
[boron, Appl. Phys. Lett. 100 (4) (2012) 042110.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref40)

[[47] D. MacDonald, A. Liu, A. Cuevas, B. Lim, J. Schmidt, The impact of dopant](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref41)
[compensation on the boron–oxygen defect in p‐and n‐type crystalline silicon,](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref41)
[Phys. Status Solidi (A) 208 (3) (2011) 559–563.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref41)

[48] R. Crabb, Photon induced degradation of electron irradiated silicon solar cells, in:
Proceedings of the Ninth IEEE Photovoltaic Specialists Conference, Silver Springs,
1972, pp. 329–330.

[[49] A. Herguth, G. Schubert, M. Käs, G. Hahn, Investigations on the long time behavior](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref42)
[of the metastable boron–oxygen complex in crystalline silicon, Prog. Photovolt.:](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref42)
[Res. Appl. 16 (2) (2008) 135–140.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref42)

[[50] J.D. Weeks, J.C. Tully, L. Kimerling, Theory of recombination-enhanced defect](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref43)
[reactions in semiconductors, Phys. Rev. B 12 (8) (1975) 3286.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref43)

[[51] K. Bothe, R. Hezel, J. Schmidt, Recombination-enhanced formation of the me-](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref44)
[tastable boron–oxygen complex in crystalline silicon, Appl. Phys. Lett. 83 (6)](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref44)
[(2003) 1125–1127.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref44)

[52] J. Schmidt, K. Bothe, R. Hezel, Formation and annihilation of the metastable defect in boron-doped Czochralski silicon, IEEE, pp. 178–181.

[53] B. Lim, S. Hermann, K. Bothe, J. Schmidt, R. Brendel, Permanent deactivation of


-----

the boron-oxygen recombination center in silicon solar cells, in: Proceedings of the
23rd European Photovoltaic Solar Energy Conference, p. 1018.

[54] A. Herguth, G. Schubert, M. Kaes, G. Hahn, in: Proceedings of the 32nd IEEE PVSC
(4th WCPEC), Waikoloa, USA, p. 940.

[55] S. Wilking, J. Engelhardt, S. Ebert, C. Beckh, A. Herguth, G. Hahn, High speed
regeneration of BO-defects: improving long-term solar cell performance within in:
Proceedings of the seconds, in: 29th European Photovoltaic Solar Energy
Conference and Exhibition, 2014, pp. 366–372.

[[56] K. Bothe, J. Schmidt, Electronically activated boron-oxygen-related recombination](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref45)
[centers in crystalline silicon, J. Appl. Phys. 99 (1) (2006) 013701.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref45)

[[57] S. Wilking, A. Herguth, G. Hahn, Influence of hydrogen on the regeneration of](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref46)
[boron-oxygen related defects in crystalline silicon, J. Appl. Phys. 113 (19) (2013)](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref46)
[194503.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref46)

[[58] M. Stutzmann, W. Beyer, L. Tapfer, C. Herrero, States of hydrogen in crystalline](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref47)
[silicon, Phys. B: Condens. Matter 170 (1–4) (1991) 240–244.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref47)

[[59] B. Lim, A. Liu, D. Macdonald, K. Bothe, J. Schmidt, Impact of dopant compensa-](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref48)
[tion on the deactivation of boron-oxygen recombination centers in crystalline si-](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref48)
[licon, Appl. Phys. Lett. 95 (23) (2009) 232109.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref48)

[[60] B. Lim, K. Bothe, J. Schmidt, Impact of oxygen on the permanent deactivation of](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref49)
[boron–oxygen-related recombination centers in crystalline silicon, J. Appl. Phys.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref49)
[107 (12) (2010) 123707.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref49)

[[61] B. Lim, K. Bothe, J. Schmidt, Deactivation of the boron–oxygen recombination](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref50)
[center in silicon by illumination at elevated temperature, Phys. Status Solidi](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref50)
[(RRL)-Rapid Res. Lett. 2 (3) (2008) 93–95.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref50)

[[62] S. Pearton, J. Corbett, T. Shi, Hydrogen in crystalline semiconductors, Appl. Phys.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref51)
[A 43 (3) (1987) 153–195.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref51)

[[63] J. Hong, W. Kessels, W. Soppe, A. Weeber, W. Arnoldbik, M. Van de Sanden,](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref52)
[Influence of the high-temperature “firing” step on high-rate plasma deposited si-](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref52)
[licon nitride films used as bulk passivating antireflection coatings on silicon solar](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref52)
[cells, J. Vac. Sci. Technol. B: Microelectron. Nanometer Struct. Process., Meas.,](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref52)
[Phenom. 21 (5) (2003) 2123–2132.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref52)

[[64] C. Boehme, G. Lucovsky, Dissociation reactions of hydrogen in remote plasma-](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref53)
[enhanced chemical-vapor-deposition silicon nitride, Journal of Vacuum Science &](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref53)
[Technology A: vacuum, J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A: Vac. Surf. Films 19 (5) (2001)](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref53)
[2622–2628.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref53)

[[65] S. Wilking, S. Ebert, A. Herguth, G. Hahn, Influence of hydrogen effusion from](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref54)
[hydrogenated silicon nitride layers on the regeneration of boron-oxygen related](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref54)
[defects in crystalline silicon, J. Appl. Phys. 114 (19) (2013) 194512.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref54)

[[66] N. Nampalli, B.J. Hallam, C.E. Chan, M.D. Abbott, S.R. Wenham, Influence of](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref55)
[hydrogen on the mechanism of permanent passivation of boron–oxygen defects in](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref55)
[p-type Czochralski silicon, IEEE J. Photovolt. 5 (6) (2015) 1580–1585.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref55)

[[67] M. Stavola, F. Jiang, S. Kleekajai, L. Wen, C. Peng, V. Yelundur, A. Rohatgi,](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref56)
[G. Hahn, L. Carnel, J. Kalejs, Hydrogen passivation of defects in crystalline silicon](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref56)
[solar cells, MRS Proc. (2009).](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref56)

[[68] A. Rohatgi, V. Yelundur, J. Jeong, A. Ebong, M. Rosenblum, J. Hanoka,](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref57)
[Fundamental understanding and implementation of Al-enhanced PECVD SiN x](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref57)
[hydrogenation in silicon ribbons, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells 74 (1) (2002)](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref57)
[117–126.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref57)

[[69] R. Lüdemann, Hydrogen passivation of multicrystalline silicon solar cells, Mater.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref58)
[Sci. Eng.: B 58 (1) (1999) 86–90.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref58)

[[70] D.C. Walter, B. Lim, J. Schmidt, Realistic efficiency potential of next‐generation](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref59)
[industrial Czochralski‐grown silicon solar cells after deactivation of the bor-](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref59)
[on–oxygen‐related defect center, Progress. Photovolt.: Res. Appl. 24 (7) (2016)](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref59)
[920–928.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref59)

[71] T. Pernau, O. Romer, W. Scheiffele, A. Reichart, W. Jooß, Rather High Speed
Regeneration of BO-Defects: Regeneration Experiments with Large Cell Batches,
in: Proceedings of the 31st European Photovoltaic Solar Energy Conference, 2015,
pp. 918–920.

[72] D.C. Walter, T. Pernau, J. Schmidt, Ultrafast Lifetime Regeneration in an Industrial
Belt-Line Furnace Applying Intense Illumination at Elevated Temperature,
in: Proceedings of the 32nd European Photovoltaic Solar Energy Conference and
Exhibition, 2016, pp. 469–473.

[[73] B. Lim, K. Bothe, J. Schmidt, Accelerated deactivation of the boron–oxygen-related](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref60)
[recombination centre in crystalline silicon, Semicond. Sci. Technol. 26 (9) (2011)](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref60)
[095009.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref60)

[[74] B.J. Hallam, P.G. Hamer, S. Wang, L. Song, N. Nampalli, M.D. Abbott, C.E. Chan,](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref61)
[D. Lu, A.M. Wenham, L. Mai, Advanced hydrogenation of dislocation clusters and](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref61)
[boron-oxygen defects in silicon solar cells, Energy Procedia 77 (2015) 799–809.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref61)

[[75] S. Wilking, A. Herguth, G. Hahn, Influence of hydrogenated passivation layers on](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref62)
[the regeneration of boron-oxygen related defects, Energy Procedia 38 (2013)](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref62)
[642–648.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref62)

[[76] S.H. Lee, Advancements in n-type base crystalline silicon solar cells and their](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref63)
[emergence in the photovoltaic industry, Sci. World J. 2013 (2013).](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref63)

[[77] D. Macdonald, L. Geerligs, Recombination activity of interstitial iron and other](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref64)
[transition metal point defects in p-and n-type crystalline silicon, Appl. Phys. Lett.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref64)
[85 (18) (2004) 4061–4063.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref64)

[78] H. Kanno, D. Ide, Y. Tsunomura, S. Taira, T. Baba, Y. Yoshimine, M. Taguchi, T.
Kinoshita, H. Sakata, E. Maruyama, Over 22% Efficient HIT Solar Cell,
in: Proceedings of the 23rd European Photovoltaic Solar Energy Conference,
Valencia, 2008, pp. 1136–1139.

[79] P.J. Cousins, D.D. Smith, H.-.C. Luan, J. Manning, T.D. Dennis, A. Waldhauer, K.E.
Wilson, G. Harley, W.P. Mulligan, Generation 3: Improved performance at lower
cost, Photovoltaic Specialists Conference (PVSC), in: Proceedings of the 2010 35th
IEEE, IEEE, 2010, pp. 000275–000278.

[[80] R. Søndenå, Y. Hu, M. Juel, M.S. Wiig, H. Angelskår, Characterization of the OSF-](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref65)
[band structure in n-type Cz-Si using photoluminescence-imaging and visual](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref65)


[inspection, J. Cryst. Growth 367 (2013) 68–72.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref65)

[[81] R.J. Falster, M. Cornara, D. Gambaro, M. Olmo, M. Pagani, Effect of high tem-](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref66)
[perature pre-anneal on oxygen precipitates nucleation kinetics in Si, Solid State](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref66)
[Phenom. Trans. Tech. Publ. (1997) 123–128.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref66)

[82] D. Walter, B. Lim, R. Falster, J. Binns, J. Schmidt, Understanding Lifetime
Degradation in Czochralski-Grown N-Type Silicon after High-Temperature
Processing, in: Proceedings of the 28th European Photovoltaic Solar Energy
Conference and Exhibition, Paris, 2013, pp. 699–702.

[[83] J.D. Murphy, R. McGuire, K. Bothe, V. Voronkov, R.J. Falster, Minority carrier](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref67)
[lifetime in silicon photovoltaics: the effect of oxygen precipitation, Sol. Energy](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref67)
[Mater. Sol. Cells 120 (2014) 402–411.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref67)

[84] B. Hallam, S. Wang, A. Ciesla, P. Hamer, C. Chan, M. Abbott, S.R. Wenham,
Hydrogen passivation for highly defected commercial grade n-type CZ wafers and
oxygen precipitates, in: Proceedings of the 29th European Photovoltaic Solar
Energy Conference and Exhibition, Amsterdam, 2014, pp. 608–611.

[[85] B. Hallam, C. Chan, M. Abbott, S. Wenham, Hydrogen passivation of defect-rich n-](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref68)
[type Czochralski silicon and oxygen precipitates, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells 141](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref68)
[(2015) 125–131.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref68)

[[86] N. Yuge, H. Baba, Y. Sakaguchi, K. Nishikawa, H. Terashima, F. Aratani,](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref69)
[Purification of metallurgical silicon up to solar grade, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref69)
[34 (1–4) (1994) 243–250.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref69)

[87] K. Ounadjela, A. Bloss, New metallization technique for 6 MW pilot production of
multicrystalline solar cells using upgraded metallurgical grade silicon, CaliSolar
[inc. Sunnyvale, 〈https://www.energy.gov/eere/solar/downloads/new-](https://www.energy.gov/eere/solar/downloads/new-metallization-technique-suitable-6-mw-pilot-production-efficient)
[metallization-technique-suitable-6-mw-pilot-production-efficient〉, 2010.](https://www.energy.gov/eere/solar/downloads/new-metallization-technique-suitable-6-mw-pilot-production-efficient)

[88] D. Kohler, B. Raabe, S. Braun, S. Seren, G. Hahn, Upgraded metallurgical grade
silicon solar cells: A detailed material analysis, in: Proceedings of the 24th
European Photovoltaic Solar Energy Conference, Hamburg, Germany, 2009.

[89] J. Kraiem, B. Drevet, F. Cocco, N. Enjalbert, S. Dubois, D. Camel, D. GrossetBourbange, D. Pelletier, T. Margaria, R. Einhaus, High performance solar cells
made from 100% UMG silicon obtained via the PHOTOSIL process, in: Proceedings
of the Photovoltaic Specialists Conference (PVSC), 2010 35th IEEE, IEEE, 2010,
pp. 001427–001431.

[[90] P. Engelhart, J. Wendt, A. Schulze, C. Klenke, A. Mohr, K. Petter, F. Stenzel,](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref70)
[S. Hörnlein, M. Kauert, M. Junghänel, R&D pilot line production of multi-crys-](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref70)
[talline Si solar cells exceeding cell efficiencies of 18%, Energy Procedia 8 (2011)](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref70)
[313–317.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref70)

[[91] Y. Schiele, S. Wilking, F. Book, T. Wiedenmann, G. Hahn, Record efficiency of](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref71)
[PhosTop solar cells from n-type Cz UMG silicon wafers, Energy Procedia 38 (2013)](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref71)
[459–466.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref71)

[92] R. Einhaus, J. Kraiem, J. Degoulange, O. Nichiporuk, M. Forster, P. Papet, Y.
Andrault, D. Grosset-Bourbange, F. Cocco, 19% efficiency heterojunction solar
cells on Cz wafers from non-blended upgraded metallurgical silicon, in:
Proceedings of the Photovoltaic Specialists Conference (PVSC), 2012 38th IEEE,
IEEE, 2012, pp. 003234–003237.

[[93] P. Zheng, F. Rougieux, C. Samundsett, X. Yang, Y. Wan, J. Degoulange, R. Einhaus,](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref72)
[P. Rivat, D. Macdonald, Upgraded metallurgical-grade silicon solar cells with ef-](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref72)
[ficiency above 20%, Appl. Phys. Lett. 108 (12) (2016) 122103.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref72)

[[94] S. De Wolf, J. Szlufcik, Y. Delannoy, I. Perichaud, C. Häßler, R. Einhaus, Solar cells](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref73)
[from upgraded metallurgical grade (UMG) and plasma-purified UMG multi-crys-](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref73)
[talline silicon substrates, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells 72 (1) (2002) 49–58.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref73)

[[95] J. Junge, A. Herguth, G. Hahn, D. Kreßner-Kiel, R. Zierer, Investigation of de-](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref74)
[gradation in solar cells from different mc-Si materials, Energy Procedia 8 (2011)](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref74)
[52–57.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref74)

[[96] B. Lim, F. Rougieux, D. Macdonald, K. Bothe, J. Schmidt, Generation and anni-](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref75)
[hilation of boron–oxygen-related recombination centers in compensated p-and n-](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref75)
[type silicon, J. Appl. Phys. 108 (10) (2010) 103722.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref75)

[[97] N. Yuge, M. Abe, K. Hanazawa, H. Baba, N. Nakamura, Y. Kato, Y. Sakaguchi,](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref76)
[S. Hiwasa, F. Aratani, Purification of metallurgical‐grade silicon up to solar grade,](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref76)
[Prog. Photovolt.: Res. Appl. 9 (3) (2001) 203–209.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref76)

[[98] D. Sarti, R. Einhaus, Silicon feedstock for the multi-crystalline photovoltaic in-](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref77)
[dustry, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells 72 (1) (2002) 27–40.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref77)

[[99] J. Degoulange, I. Perichaud, C. Trassy, S. Martinuzzi, Multicrystalline silicon](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref78)
[wafers prepared from upgraded metallurgical feedstock, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref78)
[Cells 92 (10) (2008) 1269–1273.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref78)

[[100] B.J. Hallam, P.G. Hamer, S.R. Wenham, M.D. Abbott, A. Sugianto, A.M. Wenham,](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref79)
[C.E. Chan, G. Xu, J. Kraiem, J. Degoulange, Advanced bulk defect passivation for](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref79)
[silicon solar cells, IEEE J. Photovolt. 4 (1) (2014) 88–95.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref79)

[[101] D. Kray, S. Hopman, A. Spiegel, B. Richerzhagen, G.P. Willeke, Study on the edge](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref80)
[isolation of industrial silicon solar cells with waterjet-guided laser, Sol. Energy](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref80)
[Mater. Sol. Cells 91 (17) (2007) 1638–1644.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref80)

[[102] S. Wenham, Buried‐contact silicon solar cells, Prog. Photovolt.: Res. Appl. 1 (1)](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref81)
[(1993) 3–10.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref81)

[103] U. Besu-Vetrella, L. Pirozzi, E. Salza, G. Ginocchietti, F. Ferrazza, L. Ventura, A.
Slaoui, J. Muller, Large area, screen printed silicon solar cells with selective
emitter made by laser overdoping and RTA spin-on glasses, in” Proceedings of the
Photovoltaic Specialists Conference, 1997, Conference Record of the Twenty-Sixth
IEEE, IEEE, 1997, pp. 135–138.

[[104] M. Abbott, J. Cotter, Optical and electrical properties of laser texturing for](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref82)
[high‐efficiency solar cells, Prog. Photovolt.: Res. Appl. 14 (3) (2006) 225–235.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref82)

[[105] A. Knorz, M. Peters, A. Grohe, C. Harmel, R. Preu, Selective laser ablation of SiNx](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref83)
[layers on textured surfaces for low temperature front side metallizations, Prog.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref83)
[Photovolt.: Res. Appl. 17 (2) (2009) 127–136.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref83)

[[106] Y. Park, J. Lu, G. Rozgonyi, Segregation and thermal dissociation of hydrogen at](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref84)
[the (110)/(001) silicon grain boundary, Electron. Mater. Lett. 6 (1) (2010) 1–5.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref84)

[[107] K. Nakayashiki, A. Rohatgi, S. Ostapenko, I. Tarasov, Minority-carrier lifetime](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref85)


-----

[enhancement in edge-defined film-fed grown Si through rapid thermal processing-](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref85)
[assisted reduction of hydrogen-defect dissociation, J. Appl. Phys. 97 (2) (2005)](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref85)
[024504.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref85)

[[108] H.Y. Cho, E.K. Kim, S.K. Min, K. Chang, C. Lee, Electric‐field‐enhanced dissocia-](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref86)
[tion of the hydrogen‐Si donor complex in GaAs, J. Appl. Phys. 68 (10) (1990)](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref86)
[5077–5080.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref86)

[[109] L. Song, L. Mai, S. Wenham, Laser induced localised hydrogen passivation, Sol.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref87)
[Energy 122 (2015) 341–346.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref87)



[[110] L. Song, A. Wenham, S. Wang, P. Hamer, M.S. Ahmmed, B. Hallam, L. Mai,](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref88)
[M. Abbott, E.R. Hawkes, C. Chong, Laser enhanced hydrogen passivation of silicon](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref88)
[wafers, Int. J. Photo. 2015 (2015).](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref88)

[[111] P. Hamer, S. Wang, B. Hallam, S. Wenham, C.M. Chong, A. Wenham, M. Abbott,](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref89)
[Laser illumination for manipulation of hydrogen charge states in silicon solar cells,](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref89)
[Phys. Status Solidi (RRL)-Rapid Res. Lett. 9 (2) (2015) 111–114.](http://refhub.elsevier.com/S1369-8001(17)32504-0/sbref89)

[[112] International Technology Roadmap for Photovoltaic (ITRPV) Home Page, 〈http://](http://www.itrpv.net/)
[www.itrpv.net/〉. (Accessed Oct. 2017).](http://www.itrpv.net/)


-----

