phys. stat. sol. (a) 204, No. 7, 2129–2184 (2007) / DOI 10.1002/pssa.200622520

**Review Article**

# Hydrogen blistering of silicon:  Progress in fundamental understanding

Bernard Terreault[*]

Institut National de la Recherche Scientifique–Energie, Matériaux et Télécommunications,
Université du Québec, 1650 boul. Lionel-Boulet, Varennes (Québec) J3X 1S2, Canada

Received 27 October 2006, revised 2 March 2007, accepted 2 May 2007
Published online 3 July 2007

PACS 61.72.Qq, 61.72.Tt, 61.82.Fk, 85.40.–e

When silicon is implanted with a sufficient concentration of H ions, at low to moderate temperature, and
subsequently annealed at high temperature, dome-shaped gas-filled blisters and/or craters of exploded
blisters appear on the surface. Under particular conditions, blistering can be produced by plasma hydrogenation as well. The phenomenon is another facet of hydrogen behaviour in silicon, a question with both
fundamental and applied implications. Blistering is at the origin of the “ion-cutting” process for the fabrication of silicon-on-insulator and other heterostructures; this process is particularly useful whenever
atomically sharp interfaces between layers are required. The novelty and vast potential of this process has
spurred since the mid-1990’s a burst of experimental activity on blistering. The purposes of those works
were either to improve or extend the ion-cut process, or to clarify its underlying mechanisms. In “mechanisms”, the plural is used to convey the fact that it is a multi-step phenomenon. Because of this complexity, the theoretical work, in comparison, is far less abundant. Hydrogen blistering of silicon is qualitatively
understood in broad terms: H being insoluble in Si, it tends to segregate into cavities which grow and coalesce at high temperature, and the H2 pressure in the cavities finally deforms the surface. In fact, our understanding of the microscopic mechanisms has progressed much beyond that level thanks to the sophisticated work that has been carried out using techniques such as transmission electron microscopy, Rutherford backscattering in the channelling mode, infrared spectroscopy of local vibrational modes, stress and
strain measurements, and others. The effects of n- or p-doping, He ion coimplantation, and isotope substitution have also greatly helped in discriminating between different hypotheses. After a review of the most
relevant experimental facts, the blistering mechanisms that have been proposed in the literature will be
discussed and their conformity with the data assessed. Finally an attempt will be made to identify the key
questions and suggest a few avenues for future work.

© 2007 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim

Contents

1 Introduction
1.1 Scope and emphasis of this review
1.2 Blistering and the question of hydrogen interactions with defects in semiconductors
1.3 Application of blistering: ion-cutting in microtechnology

-  e-mail: terreault@emt.inrs.ca, Phone: +1-450-929-8111, Fax: +1-450-929-8102

© 2007 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim


-----

2130 B. Terreault: Hydrogen blistering of silicon

2 Phenomenology of H blistering of Si
2.1 Dose window giving rise to blistering
2.2 Blister morphology and dimensions; fracture mechanics
2.3 Thermodynamics
2.4 Are there significant differences between blistering and ion-cutting?

3 Mechanistic investigations using microscopic probes
3.1 Transmission electron microscopy of extended defects; platelets
3.2 H depth profile evolution
3.3 Defect creation and evolution probed by ion channelling
3.4 H-defect interaction and evolution probed by IR spectroscopy
3.5 Open volume evolution probed by positron annihilation spectroscopy
3.6 Stress and strain
3.7 Spatial correlations; the depth of splitting
3.8 Elusive hydrogen
3.9 Temperature correlations; blistering scenarios

4 Insights obtained using hydrogen engineering
4.1 Implantation temperature optimization
4.2 Effect of dopants
4.3 Effect of He ion coimplantation
4.4 Effect of isotope substitution
4.5 Plasma hydrogenation and artificially imposed strain

5 Models and theories
5.1 Background on hydrogen in silicon
5.2 Dynamic interaction of hydrogen with mobile defects during implantation
5.3 Platelet nucleation mechanisms
5.4 Final step: from platelets to blisters

6 Conclusions

References

List of acronyms


AFM
CVD
Cz-Si

ERD(A)
FZ-Si

HRTEM

IBA
IRAS
KLMC
LACBED

LVM
MBE


Atomic force microscopy
Chemical vapour deposition
Silicon crystal grown by the
Czochralski process
Elastic recoil detection (analysis)
Silicon crystal grown by the
float-zone process
High resolution transmission
electron microscopy
Ion beam analysis
Infrared absorption spectroscopy
Kinetic lattice Monte-Carlo
Large angle convergent beam
electron diffraction
Local vibrational mode
Molecular beam epitaxy


MV
NRA
PECVD

PAS
RBS/C

RSS
SIMS
SOI
TEM
TDS
XRD
XTEM


Multivacancy
Nuclear reaction analysis
Plasma-enhanced chemical
vapour deposition
Positron annihilation spectroscopy
Rutherford backscattering
in the channelling mode
Raman scattering spectroscopy
Secondary ion mass spectrometry
Silicon-on-insulator
Transmission electron microscopy
Thermal desorption spectroscopy
X-ray diffraction
Cross section transmission electron
microscopy


© 2007 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim www.pss-a.com


-----

phys. stat. sol. (a) 204, No. 7 (2007) 2131

1 Introduction

1.1 Scope and emphasis of this review

When silicon is implanted with a sufficient concentration of H ions (several H at%), usually at room
temperature but occasionally at cryogenic temperature or at a few hundred Celsius, and subsequently
annealed at high temperature (e.g. at ∼400–500 °C for 10 min to an hour), dome-shaped blisters as well
as craters of exploded blisters appear on the surface, as first reported in 1976 by Ligeon and Guivarc’h

[1]. Typical blisters and craters are shown in Fig. 1 [2]. This takes place for ion energies as low as 2 keV

[3] and as high as 1 MeV [4]. Under particular conditions, blisters can be produced by plasma hydrogenation as well [5]. Blistering has also been observed on many other semiconductors: Ge [6, 7], SiC [7,
8], GaAs [7, 9, 10], InP [11], and insulators: diamond [6], Si3N4 [11], SrTiO3 [7, 12], LaAlO3 [13],
LiNbO3 [11]. Helium ion implantation can also induce blistering in silicon, but only at very high doses
(concentrations in the tens of at%), a situation reminiscent of helium blistering of metals [14, 15]. (GaAs,
in contrast, is more easily blistered using He ions [9, 16].)
Light ion blistering is indeed a very common phenomenon, and it is qualitatively understood in broad
terms. H and He are hardly soluble in most materials, therefore they tend to segregate into cavities which
grow and coalesce at high temperature, and the gas pressure in the cavities finally deforms the surface. If
this makes sense thermodynamically, by what path, under what conditions, and how fast does it happen –
if it happens at all before the gas is reemitted through the surface – varies enormously. From the evidence, it is unlikely that there exists a single, general, microscopic mechanism: this is true not only when
H and He blistering are compared [16], but also when H blistering of supposedly similar semiconductors
like Si and Ge are compared [7]. For fundamental as well as practical reasons, hydrogen blistering of
silicon has received the bulk of the attention. Only in this case have there been enough experimental
studies using sophisticated probes to make real progress in understanding the underlying, atomic scale,
mechanisms. Silicon is also the subject of most of the theoretical work. Consequently, this review, whose
objective is to give an overall picture of “where do we stand” and “what are the still open questions” in
our understanding of blistering, must less ambitiously limit its scope to hydrogen in silicon. Understanding blistering means establishing a scenario, based on fundamental physics, for the evolution leading to
it, because it involves a number of successive steps: the creation of defects by implantation or otherwise,
the interaction of H with these defects during implantation, then the high temperature evolution of the
H-defect complexes into presumed blister precursors such as the “(001) platelet” [17], and finally the
pressure-driven crack propagation and elastic (and eventually plastic) deformation giving rise to micron
sized blisters. In the author’s opinion, there is as yet no totally convincing detailed scenario of blister

a) b) c)


Fig. 1 Atomic force micrographs (AFM) of Si(001) surfaces showing blisters produced by 2 × 1016 H/cm2 (a), and
craters produced by 4 × 1016 H/cm2 in 3D view (b) and in cross section (c); the crater depth of ∼ 75 nm roughly corresponds to the mean projected range of the 5 keV ions (from Giguère et al. [2]).

www.pss-a.com © 2007 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim


-----

2132 B. Terreault: Hydrogen blistering of silicon

nucleation. An attempt will be made to identify key questions and suggest a few avenues for future work.
Once a clear and credible scenario has been established for H in Si, the analogies and differences found
in other ion-material combinations will hopefully help in understanding those other cases as well.

1.2 Blistering and the question of hydrogen interactions with defects in semiconductors

The blistering phenomenon is but another facet of hydrogen behaviour in silicon, a question with both
fundamental and applied implications that will not be detailed here, because it has been the subject of
numerous and authoritative reviews since the mid-1980’s [18–22]. Hydrogen can be incorporated at
many steps in silicon device processing. Sometimes this happens adventitiously, unwillingly or unknowingly, though this rarely causes the type of damage we will talk about. Other times, hydrogen compounds
are used in processing, as in surface conditioning with acids or hydroxides or as in chemical vapour
deposition from a precursor like silane: here H introduction may not be the goal but it happens all the
same. Finally, it can be injected deliberately by ion implantation or plasma exposure. The way by which
H enters Si determines the type and extent of damage. Exposure to molecular H2 at high temperature and
pressure results in little measurable damage, although infrared spectroscopy clearly shows hydrogen
presence in the lattice [23]. On the other hand, exposure to atomic hydrogen, even from a remote plasma,
produces a peculiar type of defect, the {111} platelet, a nanometer size disc-shaped cavity decorated
with, and stabilized by, adsorbed hydrogen, and lying in {111} planes [24–27]. Finally, if energetic H
ions are implanted, an abundance of diverse defects is produced. The ion’s collisions with lattice atoms
produce point defects (vacancies, V, and self-interstitials, I) [28, 29]. At room temperature these are
mobile in Si, and so are the H atoms that have just been implanted; the three species (V, I, H) migrate
until either H reacts with a dangling bond, or V and I annihilate, or V’s or I’s form clusters, or they disappear at sinks including the surface. Many aspects of these processes have already been clarified as
discussed in the cited reviews [18–22]. But they are still being studied in earnest, in particular in relation
with blistering, but also in connection with other important questions such as defect passivation and
dopant inactivation. It must be added that H atoms are very reactive not only with the dangling bonds
provided by V’s and I’s, but also with almost any impurity (O, C, metals) and with common dopants (B,
P, As, Sb).

1.3 Application of blistering: ion-cutting in microtechnology

Silicon blistering was considered a nuisance and attracted only sporadic attention for nearly two decades.
Indeed, investigators of H behaviour in Si generally used subthreshold H doses and avoided the complications due to blistering. However, as we shall see, blistering-related work has contributed valuable insights into H–Si interactions. The burst of activities that has taken place since the mid-1990’s springs
directly from the perspectives opened by Bruel’s invention of ion-cutting [30]. It is not our purpose to
discuss in detail this technological use of blistering for silicon-on-insulator (SOI)[1] fabrication: This has
been reviewed by Bruel [31] in 1998 and Celler and Cristoloveanu [32] in 2003, and more recent progress was reported at the ECS Symposium on SOI [33]. Ion cutting is in fact a generic process applicable
not only to the now commercial fabrication of SOI, but also to the creation of a wide variety of heterostructures composed of semiconductor and/or insulator layers [11]. It is particularly useful whenever
atomically sharp and defect-free interfaces between layers are required. Briefly, in its original form [30],
the process works as follows: (1) A “donor” Si wafer “A” is given a thin thermal oxide or else its surface
is cleaned and made hydrophilic; (2) wafer A is implanted with a dose of several 10[16] H/cm[2] at a typical
energy of tens of keV; (3) a “handle” wafer “B” with a thick, high quality, thermal, CVD or PECVD
oxide is bonded hydrophilically to wafer A (this involves a mild anneal to strengthen the bond and improve the interface quality [34]); (4) the bonded pair is annealed up to the blistering temperature; the
presence of wafer B on top of wafer A prevents the A surface from deforming and, instead, the gas pres
1 A list of acronyms is given at the beginning of the paper.

© 2007 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim www.pss-a.com


-----

phys. stat. sol. (a) 204, No. 7 (2007) 2133

sure drives lateral crack propagation parallel to the surface over the whole wafer area; a thin layer of Si
from A (typically hundreds of nm) thus remains attached to B: A SOI structure results. The transferred
layer can be further thinned and smoothed by standard means.


2 Phenomenology of H blistering of Si


At the outset it is important to note that a multitude of parameters can possibly influence blistering.
Therefore, if not specified otherwise, the results presented from hereon pertain to room temperature (RT)
implantation of the most standard material, low-doped or undoped Cz-grown Si(001) crystals with resistivity of 1 Ω cm or more. Note that amorphous Si does not blister, although both H2 [35, 36] and plateletlike configurations [37] have been detected in a-Si; presumably its structure accommodates isolated H2
or small bubbles or platelets which do not coalesce.

2.1 Dose window giving rise to blistering


Blistering is a threshold phenomenon and the minimum ion fluence or H concentration giving rise to
blisters would seem to be one of the most fundamental quantities for any microscopic theory. Nevertheless, the threshold dose has not been the object of much precise and systematic work (presumably because it is tedious work and the prospect of a really accurate theory appears remote). One would also
have to define precisely the threshold (scattered blisters or near complete surface coverage?). Most of the
literature concerns work done with ion energies in the tens of keV and doses above 4 × 10[16] H/cm[2], and
the threshold is around that value at those energies. Explicit results [3, 38–42] are shown in Fig. 2 (lower
border of shaded area). Since the fundamental parameter is presumably the H concentration, the ion
fluence was converted into the H concentration at its peak, using numerical simulations performed with
the code SRIM [43]. It is seen that the threshold is approximately 5 at%. Less well known is the existence of a maximum dose. At low energy (≤10 keV) there is definitely an upper limit [3], as shown in
Fig. 3 for 5 keV: there are no more blisters or craters for 6 × 10[16] and 1 × 10[17] H/cm[2] (compare with
2 × 10[16] and 4 × 10[16] H/cm[2] in Fig. 1). The width of the blistering window increases with the energy. At a
higher energy of 40 keV, Liu et al. [38] also found a maximum blistering dose, their cut-off being somewhere between 8 × 10[16] and 1.6 × 10[17] H/cm[2], probably nearer to the upper end of this range, since several authors [39–41] found blisters for 1 × 10[17] H/cm[2] at comparable energies. The available information
on the maximum blistering doses are summarized in Fig. 2.
Two other features appear in the AFM pictures of Fig. 3, obtained by 5 keV H implantation into a
trench defined lithographically in a polymethylmetacrylate mask. At high dose (≥6 × 10[16] H/cm[2]), the
implanted region swells uniformly, even at room temperature, instead of blistering. The line scans of

14

12

) or H at.% 10


Fig. 2 (online colour at: www.pss-a.com) Threshold and
maximum H doses or concentrations for blistering of implanted and annealed lightly doped Si(001). Shaded area:
blistering window; solid line: threshold H atom concentration. Data from Moutanabbir et al. [3], Liu et al. [38],
Huang et al. [39], Höchbauer et al. [40], Aspar et al. [41]
and Bedell & Lanford [42].


**blistering**
min H at. % **window**


10 100


H ion energy (keV)

www.pss-a.com © 2007 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim


-----

2134 B. Terreault: Hydrogen blistering of silicon

a) b) c)


**25**

**20**


**15**

**10**


Fig. 3 AFM of Si samples implanted with 5 keV H ions through
PMMA masks with 6 µm wide trenches: (a) 6 × 1016 H/cm2 and
annealed at 900 °C for 3 s; (b) 10 × 1016 H/cm2 and (c) 20 × 1016
H/cm2, not annealed; (d) line scans for 3 and 10 × 1016 H/cm2
showing either small blisters (narrow spikes) or swelling (from
Giguère et al. [2]).


d)



**_10 x10[16]H/cm[2]_**

**_3 x10[16]H/cm[2]_**

**0** **2** **4** **6** **8** **10 12 14**


X (µ m)


Fig. 3(d) illustrate the contrast between the low dose (3 × 10[16] H/cm[2], blistering) and high dose
(1 × 10[17] H/cm[2], swelling). This is consistent with the explanation offered in Ref. [44] for the high dose
blister absence: At high dose, the cavity-rich region becomes thick, i.e. not small compared to the ion
range, and the stress is rather uniform over this whole thickness. Moreover, the compressive stress generated in its neighbourhood by a gas-filled cavity will tend to close up other nearby cavities: the result is
a decrease in the average compressive stress [40]. So, a modest expansion of the numerous small cavities, resulting in swelling, can relieve the stresses. The other interesting point is that blisters reappear at
very high dose (2 × 10[17] H/cm[2], Fig. 3(c)), but this time at RT during implantation.

2.2 Blister morphology and dimensions; fracture mechanics


When they first appear, hydrogen-induced blisters are roughly circular and shaped like a dome
(Fig. 1(a)), as if produced by elastic deformation of a pressurized thin plate. The absence of dislocations
in cross section transmission electron microscopy (XTEM) observations tends to indicate that plastic
deformation is not involved [45]. Other simple observations are the following: (i) Although the packing
is dense, the blisters do not appear to form a pattern on the surface. This suggests random nucleation of
blisters and absence of long-range interactions between them. (ii) The diameter (D) and height (h) distributions are narrow with, e.g., standard deviations of ∼15% and ∼30% respectively [46]. These facts
suggest again that the blisters are nucleated at randomly located weak spots, from which point they extend in a circle whose radius is determined by the depth at which they are located, and imply a one-toone relationship between depth and radius, in agreement with the mechanics of plate deformation. Perhaps related is the fact that when H is implanted in trenches that are narrower than the normal blister
size, the blisters remain circular, though they are quite smaller, instead of conforming to the straight
walls of the trenches [2]. Note that the aspect ratio h/D is small (few percent) so that h is practically

© 2007 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim www.pss-a.com


-----

phys. stat. sol. (a) 204, No. 7 (2007) 2135

unmeasurable on plan view optical or scanning electron micrographs; even with atomic force microscopy, it is difficult to be precise because of the uncertainty on the reference level or true location of the
undeformed surface. Under the assumption of a spherical shell, the elastic strain is ε = (8/3) (h/D)[2] ∼ 10[–3]:
This value confirms that the yield stress should not have been reached.
There are relatively few quantitative data even for the diameters, or estimates of the gas pressure
(P ∼ 1 GPa [4]), contrary to He blisters on metals [14, 15]. Figure 4 shows the available measurements

[1, 2, 4, 39, 44, 46] for the average D as a function of the mean H implantation depth R. One must mention that the depth in the data of Huang [39] does not always correspond to the implantation energy: the
measurements at the depths of 80 and 300 nm were obtained by implanting at higher energy (19 and
45 keV/atom) through a 150 nm oxide that was removed after implantation; their dose was high
(1 × 10[17] H/cm[2]), corresponding to peak H concentrations in the 15–20 at% range. The trend, as expected, is that the blister diameter increases with the implant depth. One can see that a power law fit
(D ∼ R[n]) to the data of Huang gives a rather slow increase, i.e. n ∼ 0.35 (dashed line). It must be said that
the diameters are commonly observed to vary with ion dose and anneal temperature (see, e.g. the three
points for R = 75 nm). If we use the other data obtained at more typical doses (dot-dash line), we get
n ∼ 0.5.
Some authors have attempted to use the D vs. R relation to infer blistering mechanisms or material
properties. If the blister is viewed as a spherical shell formed by plastic deformation, one can obtain the
following equation [47, 48]:


D = (16hRσY/P)[1/2], (1)


where σY is the material’s yield stress. Although this formula was derived in the context of He blistering
of metals it is very general. But h and P must be derived from other arguments. If the ratio h/P were
constant one would indeed find D ∼ R[1/2]. However, h certainly increases with R, while it is not clear for
P, which may result in a higher power n. Referring specifically to H blistering of Si, Huang [39] considered blistering as resulting from cavity enlargement due to crack propagation instead; in this case the
relevant material parameters are the surface energy γ, Young’s modulus E and Poisson’s ratio ν; the
relation

D = 4(γER[3]/9α(1 – ν[2]) P[2])[1/4] (2)


is found, with α a geometrical constant of order 1; thus n = 3/4 if P is assumed constant. Since the experimental value of n is substantially smaller than 0.75, it suggests that the required pressure is increas

Fig. 4 Log–log plot of mean blister diameter D as a
function of implant depth R. The data are from Huang
et al. [39], Weldon et al. [4], Ligeon & Guivarc’h [1],
Moutanabbir et al. [44, 46], and Giguère et al. [2]. The
depths R are those given by Huang, or else those calculated by SRIM-2003. The different doses used in the
measurements at 75–80 nm are also indicated.


H/cm2)
16

D ~ R0.35

dose (10

10 D ~ R0.5
6

Huang
Weldon

2 Ligeon

Mou1.5
Gig2
Mou6

1.5

50 100 200 500 1000


Implant depth R (nm)

www.pss-a.com © 2007 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim


-----

2136 B. Terreault: Hydrogen blistering of silicon

ing with the thickness of the layer to be deformed. Although the D vs. R data may look closer to the
plastic model, other evidence favours the elastic model, as mentioned earlier. This point is important
since it implies no loss of H2 by blister rupture at this stage. One should add a caveat: It is known that
blisters pop up suddenly (within 2 s [39] and probably less) and at that stage they have a narrow size
distribution, but if heating is continued they grow further [e.g. 41]. Since the literature generally does not
state precisely at what stage the data were acquired, the published diameters may actually represent overestimates. In addition, at higher doses, not only the yield stress but the ultimate strength of the silicon can
be overcome and craters appear (Fig. 1(b), (c)).
Since there is no reason to doubt the validity of fracture and deformation mechanics, the real challenge
for theory will be to predict the amount of gas that segregates into the cavities and the ensuing pressure.
In this connection, Henttinen et al. [49] found a way to partly decouple the pressure and mechanical
strength effects: Two wafers, one of them H-implanted, were bonded as in SOI fabrication but, instead of
annealing them at high temperature, a sharp blade was inserted edgewise at the interface after a mild,
subthreshold, anneal. If the implanted zone is weaker than the wafer-to-wafer bond, then delamination
will occur at the implanted depth. From plate mechanics, the separation energy can thus be determined in
a situation in which the gas pressure, though probably present, is not the trigger of the delamination.
They found the following. (i) The measured strength decreases precipitously with temperature in the
270–300 °C range, reflecting the microscopic transformations that are taking place. (ii) The strength
depends strongly on crystal orientation, e.g. 0.7, 1.5 and 2.3 J/m[2] for (001), (111) and (110), respectively,
at 290 °C (these correspond to 0.65, 1.2 and 1.5 eV/atom on the (001), (111) and (110) surfaces respectively). (iii) Heavy boron doping reduces the strength.
The blister cover thickness (or equivalently the crater depth) is very close to the peak in H concentration or the peak in radiation damage; since these quantities differ by less than 10% [43], only very precise work using ion-beam analysis (IBA) and/or secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS) and cross
section transmission electron microscopy (XTEM) allows a distinction between the two. This point will
be discussed in Section 3.7. Whatever the case, the H localization near its mean range indicates trapping
in irradiation-induced defects.

2.3 Thermodynamics

2.3.1 Activation energies

The effective activation energy for blistering certainly reflects its underlying mechanism. This energy is
usually obtained by isothermally annealing a number of identical samples at different temperatures until
they blister, as observed visually under a microscope or through a drop in the specular reflectivity. Then

Fig. 5 Arrhenius plot of the inverse blistering time vs. inverse absolute anneal temperature (from Aspar
et al. [41], by permission).

© 2007 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim www.pss-a.com


-----

phys. stat. sol. (a) 204, No. 7 (2007) 2137

the slope of the Arrhenius plot of the blistering time vs. the inverse temperature provides an activation
energy, Ea. Early on, the Grenoble group [31] found that there is no single slope: the data showed a high
value of Ea (∼2 eV) at temperatures T < 500 °C, then a break and a low value (∼0.5 eV) at high temperature (Fig. 5 [41]). They interpreted this as meaning that the limiting step at lower temperature was the
breaking of Si–H bonds to liberate H atoms and form H2 to fill the nascent blisters, whereas, at higher
temperature, the diffusion rate of H atoms from the surrounding region into the cavities was the only
limitation. Alternatively, Tong et al. [50] interpreted the high Ea as the energy necessary to break Si–Si
bonds and induce crack propagation. In both models, the orders of magnitude of the bond energies are
right. However, these simple pictures became foggy with the finding that the “high Ea” decreased monotonically with the implanted dose [41, 42]. Figure 6 summarizes the data [4, 41, 42, 50, 51]. In addition,
the decrease is confirmed very precisely by the deuterium data of Bedell and Lanford [42] (that could not
be shown on the same graph because of an unknown conversion factor). In the framework of the Si–Si
bond breaking model, if that energy is identified with the surface energy in Eq. (2), the weakening of Ea
could be explained by the increased presence of adsorbed H atoms on the platelet internal surfaces. On
the other hand, within the Si–H bond breaking scenario it was proposed instead that the average bond
energy decreased with dose because the deepest traps are filled first [41].
Relatively little work has been done with wafers of orientation other than (001) but there is clear evidence that Si(110) crystals do not blister as easily as Si(001) and Si(111), requiring higher doses, temperatures or anneal times. Zheng et al. [52] found the same activation energies (high Ea of 1.7 eV and
low Ea of 0.7 eV) for all three orientations, but the kinetic prefactor was almost an order of magnitude
larger for (001) than for (111), and similarly for (111) compared to (110). This was tentatively explained
in terms of the density of Si–Si bonds to break. Note that this is the same ranking as found above in
Section 2.2 for the ease of purely mechanical splitting of implanted Si. However, the link between these
two measurements is not straightforward since the effect in thermally induced blistering involves only
the kinetics whereas the effect in mechanical splitting apparently involves the energetics. Recently Bourdelle et al. [51] found the same ranking but also a significant difference in the Ea values (T < 480 °C):
1.45 eV for the (001) orientation and 1.9 eV for the two other ones.


2.3.2 H2 thermal desorption

Gas release is also a probe of the thermal evolution of H-implanted Si. Weldon et al. [4] reported a burst
of H2 “coinciding with blistering” and amounting to ∼1/3 of the implanted H. It was implied that this
amount represented the contents of the blisters, although it is not evident that the gas in the blisters
should have escaped, even in part, since that implies blister rupture. Figure 7 shows the H2 desorption
rates as a function of temperature during ramp annealing (0.33 K/s), for two samples implanted at 5 keV


3,5

3,0

1,5

1,0

0,5

0,0

AspLT
AspHT
BedLT
BouLT
BouHT
WelLT
TonLT

T < 400-5000C

T > 400-5000C

5 6 7 8 9 10


Fig. 6 Activation energies for blistering of lightly doped
Si(001). The data from Aspar et al. [41], Bedell and Lanford

[42], Bourdelle et al. [51], Weldon et al. [4] and Tong et al.

[50] form two distinct groups (LT and HT) depending on
whether the temperature is below or above 400–500 °C.


Dose (1016 H/cm2)

www.pss-a.com © 2007 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim


-----

2138 B. Terreault: Hydrogen blistering of silicon


2,0

1,5


Fig. 7 H2 release rate measured by TDS for 2 × 1016 H/cm2

and 6 × 1016 H/cm2 at 5 keV (from Moutanabbir et al.

[44]).


1,0


0,5

0,0

6x1016 H/cm2 2x1016 H/cm2

H in blisters?

200 300 400 500 600 700


temperature (°C)

with 2 and 6 × 10[16] H/cm[2], respectively [44]. Cerofolini et al. [53] also reported a non vanishing desorption at 200 °C and a strong rise in the desorption rate around 400 °C. The lower dose sample of Fig. 7
blistered at ∼475 °C, so indeed an important release of gas took place while the blisters appeared and
grew. These blisters did not seem to be ruptured (similar to Fig. 1(a)), although the AFM may not be able
to detect very small (∼nm) cracks. In any case, it is impossible to say if the gas comes from the blisters
or happens to be released from the lattice at about the same time as the blisters appear. Finally, the remaining H2 is desorbed around 600 °C; this suggests that the “600 °C peak” (∼30% of total) is partly or
totally made up of the blister contents. Note, however, that there is also some H2 released at lower temperature, especially at the higher dose. (That large burst of gas at ∼325 °C is possibly related to the small
implant depth in that experiment: a gas permeable layer extending almost to the surface may be created
at high dose. Such an effect was observed in He implantation of metals [15]). There are admittedly many
uncertainties in the interpretation of desorption spectra but it remains true that: (i) desorption peaks coincide in temperature with other events measured by other techniques; and (ii) the blister gas contents
appears to be no greater than 1/3 of the implanted dose, i.e. the equivalent of ≤5 × 10[15] H/cm[2] only at low
keV energies or less than 4 monolayers of SiH2 on {100}. Under the standard conditions mentioned so
far, the greater part of the implanted hydrogen is thus “wasted”. This fact suggests that different and
possibly more effective ways of using hydrogen may be found: this is the approach dubbed here hydrogen engineering and which will be discussed in Section 4.


2.4 Are there significant differences between blistering and ion-cutting?

Ion-cutting requires crack propagation over an area (∼10[2] cm[2]) approximately 10[10] times larger than
blistering (∼10[–8] cm[2]), it is thus not surprising that it requires longer times than simple blistering [41,
50]. The comparison can hardly be precise since, during isothermal annealing, scattered blisters first
appear, followed by blister growth [11], so there is some arbitrariness in defining a “blistering time”.
Tong et al. [50] found a typical factor of 10 in splitting times, a small price to pay for a factor of 10[10] in
area. This demonstrates that blistering and wafer splitting take place in “catastrophic” fashion (it generates an audible sound [41]). More importantly, Tong et al. showed that the activation energies for both
phenomena are identical (Ea of 1.2 eV for a dose of 1 × 10[17] cm[–2], data included in Fig. 6). This gives
confidence that the physics and chemistry of the two phenomena are the same, except perhaps for the
very final purely mechanical step. This has led many to assume that basic studies on blistering of unbonded wafers can be used to quickly explore process improvements or new materials for ion-cutting.
This is generally confirmed by comparative studies. At least one counter-example has been found,
however. It concerns the maximum blistering dose. Ion-cutting has the same threshold dose of
∼1.75 × 10[16] H/cm[2] as blistering at 5 keV, but it has no upper limit [54]. This is of course fortunate for
technology, and may help in understanding why there is an upper limit in blistering. With a bonded wa

© 2007 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim www.pss-a.com


-----

phys. stat. sol. (a) 204, No. 7 (2007) 2139

fer on top, there is no alternative, except splitting, to relieve the stresses. This shows the importance for
blistering of the boundary conditions imposed on the stress and strain fields. In this particular case, blistering experiments have led to overly pessimistic prospects on ion-cutting, especially because higher
doses give smoother surfaces at those low energies [54].

3 Mechanistic investigations using microscopic probes

3.1 Transmission electron microscopy of extended defects; platelets

It is natural to look for extended structures buried under the surface as the nuclei of blisters. Romani and
Evans [17] and many others afterward [4, 11, 40, 41, 51, 55–59] indeed found in H-implanted Si planar
structures with (001) or {111} habit planes using TEM, both in plan view and in cross section. Actually,
the {111} variety had been found earlier in plasma hydrogenated Si [24], and it is the thermodynamically
favoured structure [60, 61]. The (001) platelet, on the other hand, is dominant in implanted Si(001) [40,
51, 56, 58].

3.1.1 As-implanted material

A high resolution (HR) XTEM micrograph of a platelet is shown in Fig. 8 [57]. As implied by its notation – (001), not {100} – it is located in a plane parallel to the surface. This is of course no coincidence,
the compressive stress obviously favours separation of (001) planes and overcomes the normally lower
free energy of {111} platelets. In Fig. 8 the flatness and smoothness of the parted planes is to be noted.
Similarly, the surrounding lattice is remarkably undisturbed. This is confirmed by the weakness of the
strain contrast in TEM [17, 56]. The typical (001) platelet diameters are ∼10 nm (at RT) and their thickness ∼1 nm, with a volume of ∼10[3] Ω (atomic volumes). The less numerous and smaller {111} platelets
tend to be located deeper into the crystal, beyond the peaks in hydrogen and damage, in a region of lower
stress [56, 58]. In addition, some unlikely “vertical” {100} platelets, this time accompanied by strain
contrast, have been observed [59]. In Si(111), (111) platelets unsurprisingly dominate [51]. The case of
Si(110), which is the least prone to blistering, is interesting: a mixture of {111} and {100} platelets,
which cannot be parallel to the surface, is found [51]. These observations all confirm the role of the
compressive stress in their nucleation. Moreover, the platelet-forming tendency naturally explains the
differences in mechanical strength found for the different orientations (Section 2.2), since platelets obviously weaken the crystal, and also explain the differences in splitting kinetics (Section 2.3.1).
Many investigators have noted the close connection between the (001) platelets and hydrogen. First,
the underfocus/overfocus contrast indicates a low electron-optical density, consistent with H decoration

Fig. 8 HRXTEM of (001) platelet; the 〈001〉 direction points “North-East” (from Bruel [57], by permission).

www.pss-a.com © 2007 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim


-----

2140 B. Terreault: Hydrogen blistering of silicon

of the platelets [53, 56, 58]. Second, their depth distribution is rather similar to the H distribution and
even tends to be narrower [40, 55, 56]. The internal surfaces of the (001) platelet, just like free (001)
surfaces, are expected to adsorb H exothermally (∼2 eV/atom). Unfortunately, they have not received so
far as much theoretical attention as the {111} platelets [60].


3.1.2 Thermal evolution of platelets


Under annealing, platelets grow while their number decreases [41, 55, 56, 62]. The free energy of a
platelet of radius R and thickness t may be written:

G = πR[2]t(n ∆GC + pV) + 2πR[2]γ + 2πR(tγ + Td ln (D/b)) . (3)


In this equation, the first term is the chemical potential for H in a platelet (with respect to H in solution,
∆GC < 0); the second is the pressure term if gaseous H2 is present; the third and fourth terms are the surface energies of the faces and the perimeter; and the fifth term is the strain energy, modeled as a dislocation loop [28], Td being the line tension, b the Burger’s vector and D the extent of the elastic disturbance.
Aspar et al. [56] found that the {111} platelets actually do not grow under annealing; only the (001)
kind, which are the most numerous and the most centrally located, do so. Figure 9 shows the results of
isothermal annealing at 450 °C on those [62]. The total cavity volume displayed here is a quantity
equivalent to the total defect area because the platelet thickness is constant. We see that the total volume
is constant. This type of growth is called Ostwald ripening and implies random exchange of atoms between the platelets. If we consider the free energy of the ensemble of all the platelets, we see from
Eq. (3) that the third term 2πR[2]γ is constant but the last two decrease during growth; thus, even without
net H influx into the platelet system, the total energy decreases. (And if there is an H influx, the chemical
energy gain is of course much larger than the pressure term.) During growth the platelet depth distribution was also observed to become narrower. If one assumes for simplicity that each platelet internal surface is dihydride-passivated (normal RT configuration since the {100} surface has two dangling bonds),
and with a surface density of 6.8 × 10[14] Si/cm[2], the data of Fig. 9(b) actually correspond to a total of
5 × 10[15] H/cm[2]. We see that we are close to the minimum cavity H contents necessary for blistering, as
estimated from thermal desorption in Section 2.3.2. An interesting question is what is the nature of the
atoms being exchanged between the platelets during the Ostwald-type phase of the growth (prior to the
final crack propagation phase). Of course cavity growth implies exchange of Si atoms or Si vacancies
between the platelets. However, the high temperature at which it occurs suggests that its kinetics are
limited by another factor, e.g. H atom transport. This is understandable because chemisorbed H is necessary to stabilize the platelets and probably also to weaken Si–Si bonds and lead to platelet enlargement


2,0

1,6


20

18

16

14

12

10


3,0

2,5 
2,0 
1,5 
1,0 
0.5 

1,2

0,8


0,4

0,0

Density
diameter

0 200 400 600 800


0 200 400 600 800 1000

(b) Annealing time (s)


(a)


Annealing time (s)


Fig. 9 Thermal evolution of (001) platelets in H-implanted Si (70 keV, 6 × 1016 H/cm2) under isothermal annealing
at 450 °C: mean diameter and density (a) and total volume (b) (from Grisolia et al. [62], by permission).

© 2007 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim www.pss-a.com


-----

phys. stat. sol. (a) 204, No. 7 (2007) 2141

Fig. 10 XTEM view of microcracks in Si implanted with 7 × 1016 H/cm2 at 40 keV and annealed at
600 °C for 30 min. In this particular case microcracks appear at two different characteristic depths (from
Höchbauer et al. [40], by permission).

[45]. In turn, H transport is limited by retrapping. Actually, the nucleation phase is not always complete
at RT: For a dose of 3.5 × 10[16] H/cm[2], an increase in the number of platelets, then followed by Ostwald
ripening, was observed in the first few minutes of the anneal [56], whereas for 6 × 10[16] H/cm[2] the nucleation was apparently complete at RT [62]. Facets with {100} and {111} orientations have been seen on
some [58].
At high dose under prolonged annealing, continuous microcracks parallel to the surface appear [4, 11,
40, 56, 58, 63]. In some cases, the microcrack follows an apparently continuous but zigzag path [58, 63];
in one instance, the large (001) platelets were reported to be connected by smaller {111} platelets [4], but
this seems surprising in view of the physical separation between the zones occupied by each type. An
example of microcracks is shown in Fig. 10 [40]: a typical microcrack diameter is a fraction of a micron,
that is an order of magnitude larger than a platelet (Fig. 9) and an order of magnitude smaller than a
blister (Fig. 4). It is then natural to consider that microcracking constitutes an intermediate step before
blistering. One question is when does the transition from Ostwald-type ripening to explosive growth take
place. Another is whether the growth is fueled by absorption of gas from the lattice, leading to a reduction in free energy (∆GC term in Eq. (3)), and if so, at what stage(s). It is also to be mentioned at this
point that there are dissenting voices [53, 64]: basically these authors attribute the precursor role to
smaller H2-filled cavities. These will be discussed again later.

3.2 H depth profile evolution

Hydrogen depth profiles have been measured after implantation and after annealing by secondary ion
mass spectrometry (SIMS) [65, 66], [1]H([11]B,α)[8]Be [1] and [1]H([15]N,αγ)[12]C [42] nuclear reaction analysis
(NRA), and elastic recoil detection (ERD) [65–68]. Such measurements also give the total H contents

[4], which can be correlated with the thermal desorption results (Section 2.3.2). A key feature of the H
evolution was already observed in 1976 [1], namely a narrowing of the depth distribution under annealing, with the loss occurring mostly on the shallow side. This has been confirmed by others [42, 66, 68]
and it is well illustrated by the NRA profiles of Bedell and Lanford [42] for 5 × 10[16] H/cm[2] at 100 keV,
shown in Fig. 11. At 400 °C, the profile is narrower and more peaked than at lower temperatures, and at
500 °C, the sample, which is now blistered, has lost an appreciable fraction of its H. Similarly, Weldon
et al. [4] found no decrease in total H contents below 400 °C, for both 2 × 10[16] H/cm[2] and 6 × 10[16] H/cm[2]
at 75 keV. For a subthreshold dose of 2 × 10[16] H/cm[2] (at 42 keV), high precision measurements combining SIMS and ERD show no enhanced peaking at 350 °C; the small H loss occurs mostly on the surface side [66]. Those results are qualitatively consistent with the release of H2 shown in Fig. 7
(2 × 10[16] H/cm[2]), but a quantitative comparison cannot be made due to the disparity in implantation energies (hence proximity to the surface).

www.pss-a.com © 2007 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim


-----

2142 B. Terreault: Hydrogen blistering of silicon

Fig. 11 H depth profiles (100 keV, 5 × 1016 H/cm2),
obtained using NRA, as implanted (ASI) and after
30 min anneals at 400 and 500 °C; note that a
5000 Å sacrificial oxide was removed before measurement (from Bedell & Lanford [42], by permission).

3.3 Defect creation and evolution probed by ion channelling

Rutherford backscattering in the channeling mode (RBS/C) is a powerful technique to detect disorder in
a lattice and measure its depth profile. It may be useful to recall that the enhancement in backscattering
yield includes two components. First, in the heavily damaged region, atoms displaced from their lattice
positions (self-interstitials or interstitial impurities) can directly scatter the channelled ions at backward
angles. Second, ions may simply be deflected slightly out of the channel, so that their probability of
being backscattered later, deeper inside, becomes that of an ion in a “random” trajectory; this is called
dechannelling and is visible as a deep tail in the backscattering yield. The backscattering yield can be
converted into an equivalent “density of displaced atoms”. However, that density should not be interpreted too literally as if all due to displaced atoms embedded in an ideal lattice, because the relaxation of
the lattice around any kind of defect also gives rise to enhanced scattering [69].

Fig. 12 Backscattering spectra for 2 MeV 4He particles channelled in the 〈001〉 direction in Si(001) implanted with 1–10 × 1016 H/cm2 at 40 keV. The ordinate is the backscattering yield normalized to the
same number of incident ions; the top abscissa is the energy of the backscattered α’s (1.125 MeV corresponds to the surface). The thin solid line is the random yield (from Höchbauer et al. [40], by permission).

© 2007 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim www.pss-a.com


-----

phys. stat. sol. (a) 204, No. 7 (2007) 2143

3.3.1 Dose dependence


Both components of backscattering can be seen in the [4]He backscattering spectra of Fig. 12 [40], i.e.
displacement damage in the 0.9–1.0 MeV energy range, and dechannelling below 0.9 MeV. Several
authors [40, 42, 44, 65] have studied the dose dependence of the damage by RBS/C with similar results.
The peak value of the yield increases non-linearly with dose: at subthreshold doses (≤3 × 10[16] H/cm[2]) the
level is very low; around the blistering threshold (∼5 × 10[16] H/cm[2]) it increases super linearly (although
it is not blistered at RT); and at the highest doses (≥7 × 10[16] H/cm[2]) it saturates. This indicates that the H
atoms and the point defects generated by ion implantation are reacting non linearly to create the complexes that are detected as atomic displacements. It has been known for a long time [18] that H and defects interact synergistically in Si and stabilize defects that would otherwise simply anneal out during RT
implantations. (This becomes obvious when H and He implantations are compared: paradoxically, H ions
result in much higher damage levels than He [53, 61, 70].) In Fig. 12, the displacement density actually
reaches the “random” level for 1 × 10[17] H/cm[2], although TEM shows that the crystal is in no way amorphized. This illustrates the fact that naïve interpretation of RBS/C spectra overestimates the real level of
disorder [69].

3.3.2 Dependence on temperature: reverse annealing


Pioneering work [1] showed the effect of high temperature annealing after low temperature implantation,
i.e. a dramatic increase in both backscattering and dechannelling called reverse annealing. This effect
was rediscovered in the 1990’s [42, 55]. This is shown in Fig. 13 for the displacement field and it is
equally true for dechannelling. The reverse annealing is occurring in the same temperature range as the
platelet growth. This unusual temperature dependence makes it unlikely that the backscattering is due, in


1.0

0.8


1.0

0.8


0.6

0.4


0.6

0.4


0.2

0.0


0.2

0.0


450400 [o][o]CC (a)
350 [o]C
250 [o]C
200 [o]C
as impl. 77K


450500 [o][o]CC (b)
550 [o]C
600 [o]C
650 [o]C


50 100 150 200 250 300

Depth (nm)


50 100 150 200 250 300

Depth (nm)


Fig. 13 Evolution of the displacement field in implanted Si (1.6 × 1016 H/cm2, 15.5 keV) under annealing for 2 h at 200 to 450 °C (a) and 450 to 650 °C (b) (from Cerofolini et al. [55], by permission).

www.pss-a.com © 2007 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim


-----

2144 B. Terreault: Hydrogen blistering of silicon


Fig. 14 Peak atomic displacement densities and dechannelling yields as a function of the annealing temperature.
Full symbols and solid lines refer to displacements, open
symbols and dashed lines to dechannelling; the data are
also labelled by the H ion implantation energy. The yields
are normalized to the random yield (5 and 100 keV) or the
Si atom density (15.5 keV). Data from Moutanabbir et al.

[71] (5 keV, 2 × 1016 cm–2, ramp anneal at 0.33 K/s), Cerofolini et al. [53, 55] (15.5 keV, 1.6 × 10[16] cm[–2], 2 h anneals) and Bedell & Lanford [42] (100 keV, 2 × 1016 cm–2,
30 min anneals).


60

50

40

30

20

10


disp5keV
dech5
disp15
dech15
disp100
dech100


100 200 300 400 500 600


anneal temperature (°C)

“classic” fashion, to interstitials. Rather, it suggests that it is caused by a lattice deformation. In Fig. 14 is
shown a compilation of available measurements on this subject [42, 53, 55, 71]. The maximum in displacements occurs at 400 °C to 500 °C; note that the annealing times were different in the different experiments, so exact agreement is not expected. The 5 keV data set corresponded to a blistering dose, the
other two to subthreshold doses. This last fact results in great differences in the absolute levels of displacement damage that are explained by the highly non-linear dependence on dose (Fig. 12).
Looking closely at Fig. 13, one notices that the peak shifts in depth at 250 °C and then back towards
the surface at higher temperature; the same two shifts occur, and more markedly, in Ref. [71]. In
Refs. [42] and [67], only the shift in depth at intermediate temperature is observed. The shift in depth is
suggestive of a movement from the peak in damage energy deposition to the peak in H concentration,
indicating a change in the nature of the defect responsible for backscattering [71]. The identification of
this or these defect(s) will be discussed again in Section 3.7. The opposite shift towards the surface at the
highest temperatures was seen in the most evident fashion by Tonini et al. [72] in the case of coimplantation of He and H. This is visible in Fig. 15. Starting at 400 °C, when the first blisters appear, the yield in
channels 290 to 340 increases significantly; at 500 °C and above the increase is dramatic and the yield
in these channels is flat and of the order of 50% of the random yield, which is just equal to the fraction of


**3000**

**2000**

**1000**

**0**


**4000**

**3000**

**2000**

**1000**


Fig. 15 RBS/C spectra in samples coimplanted with He and
H (1 × 1016 cm–2 each). The peak around channel 285 corre
sponds to the implant depth, the high but flat yield seen in
channels 290–340, at 500 °C and above, is due to a lattice
deformation of the surface layer (from Tonini et al. [72], by
permission).


**As imp.400** **oC**

**500[o]C**
**Si <100>**
**random**

**800900** **ooCC**

**Si <100>**
**random**


**100** **200** **300** **400**

**Channel**

© 2007 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim www.pss-a.com


-----

phys. stat. sol. (a) 204, No. 7 (2007) 2145

the surface that is covered by blisters. Indeed, those [4]He ions that happen to impinge on blister domes are
not aligned with the 〈001〉 axis and they are never channelled. The near surface enhancement in RBS/C is
thus connected with blistering and can even constitute a measure of its extent.

3.4 H-defect interaction and evolution probed by IR spectroscopy

The frequencies of the local vibration modes of the Si–H bonds are highly sensitive to their environment. For instance the stretch modes alone cover the wave number range from k ∼ 1820 cm[–1] to
k ∼ 2240 cm[–1] (Fig. 16). Most of the lines within this range have been identified with specific configurations thanks to their symmetry properties, using polarized light at different angles, by applying uniaxial
stress, by correlation with the bending modes, and by H/D isotope substitution [4, 64, 73–78]. Table 1
lists those assignments that are most relevant in the context of blistering. Note that some k values may
differ slightly between authors, due to two factors: (i) the frequencies can vary with temperature (cryogenic vs. RT measurements); (ii) the lines can also be shifted and broadened by the proximity to other
defects (low H vs. high H concentration measurements). Some complexes present more than one vibration mode and show up or not depending on the geometry or the technique used, i.e. IR absorption spectroscopy (IRAS) or Raman scattering spectroscopy (RSS). So, both IRAS [4, 41, 70, 79, 80, 85] and RSS

[64, 78, 81–84] have been highly useful to pinpoint the specific H-related defects present and monitor
their thermal evolution.

3.4.1 Thermal evolution of Si–H stretch modes: isochronal (or ramp) annealing

The first IR work specifically applied to the blistering problem is that of Weldon et al. [4]. Their basic
results are displayed in Fig. 16. This series of plots of IR absorption as a function of wave number, ob
Fig. 16 IRAS spectra of Si–H stretch modes for a sample
implanted with 6 × 1016 H/cm2 at 75 keV, at RT (i), and after
annealing for 30 min at 300 °C (ii), 425 °C (iii), 500 °C (iv),
550 °C (v) and 650 °C (vi) (from Chabal et al. [76], by permission).

www.pss-a.com © 2007 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim


-----

2146 B. Terreault: Hydrogen blistering of silicon

Table 1 Assignments of different local stretch modes of the Si–H bond to different defect complexes.

wave number (cm[–1]) identification Ref.

∼2068 VH Bech Nielsen [74]
∼2022 Lavrov [78]

∼2121, 2144 VH2 Bech Nielsen [74]

∼2166, 2191 VH3 Bech Nielsen [74]
∼2155, 2180 V2H6 Chabal [76], Lavrov [78]

∼2222, 2258 VH4 Bech Nielsen [74]
∼2205, 2234 Lavrov [78]

∼1939, 2025 V2H1,2 Weldon [4]
∼1950–2050 broadband monohydride multivacancies Weldon [4]

∼1987, 1990 IH2 Budde [75]
∼1957 Weber [64]

∼1960 4th overtone, Si optical phonon Heyman [25]

∼1838, 2062 H*2 Holbech [73]

∼1998 H[+]BC Budde [77]
∼2060–2120 Si–H on internal surfaces, including: Weldon [4], Chabal [76]
∼2084 reconstructed 1 × 1Si(111):H
∼2088–2099 reconstructed 2 × 1Si(001):H
∼2098 Si(001):H
∼2100–2120 perturbed Si(001):H

tained by implantation at 75 keV with 6 × 10[16] H/cm[2], a dose comfortably above the blistering threshold,
contains an enormous amount of information. After implantation (bottom curve) a dozen discrete modes
show up superimposed on a dominant broadband. The discrete modes are associated with small isolated
defect complexes. It can be noticed that interstitial defects are not abundant, only IH2 is seen although
interstitials and vacancies are produced in equal numbers by the atomic collisions. This discrepancy has
been noted before [21] and is plausibly due to the compressive stress that surrounds an interstitial and
repels H atoms. (This argument neglects electrostatic effects, which do not seem to play a large role in
blistering). This seems like a nice subject for theory which has treated so far only the energetics of the
defects and their vibrational properties [21]. Particularly important here are the following:
– The low wave number broadband (“LWNBB”) delimited by k < 2050 cm[–1], thought to be due to
monohydride-terminated multivacancies VnHm, m ≤ n.
– There is also a non negligible background at high k that is not well understood.
– The peaks at 2161 and 2182 cm[–1]: VH3 and/or V2H6. These two are hardly distinguishable experimentally and theoretically, but the peaks have been shown to be actually due to V2H6 in H-implanted Si

[78]).
– The hump with some peaks in the range from ∼2060 to ∼2120 cm[–1]: diverse modes of Si–H on
internal surfaces (some reconstructed), mostly {100} and henceforth labelled Si(001):H, and some
shifted and broadened by the imperfection of these internal surfaces.
The figure displays the evolution of the IR spectra after annealing for 30 min at the successively
higher temperatures given in the caption. At 300 °C (Fig. 16 (ii)), we see a general attenuation of the
LWNBB while the high wave number region shows more and more structure. At 425 °C (iii), the
LWNBB is further reduced with V2H6, VH4 (2208 cm[–1]) and a shoulder around 2100 cm[–1] emerging. At
500 °C (iv), the spectrum is composed of only two features: V2H6 and Si(001):H. Further annealing
leads to blistering and the appearance of sharper lines, characteristic of Si–H stretch vibrations on
smoother surfaces. Note that throughout the process there was a net loss of bound hydrogen starting
somewhere below 300 °C, while negligible loss of total H was found by ERD. The Si(001):H complexes
are of course identified with the (001) platelets observed by TEM. The survival of the complex at

© 2007 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim www.pss-a.com


-----

phys. stat. sol. (a) 204, No. 7 (2007) 2147

2161 cm[–1 ] while VH4 (2208 cm[–1]) has disappeared constitutes additional evidence that the 2161 cm[–1]
peak consists of V2H6 alone, since the totally passivated V2H6 is obviously more stable than VH3 and
plausibly more so than VH4 because its dissolution would require more atomic rearrangements.
Similar scenarios have been reported by Aspar et al. [41], Moutanabbir and Terreault [81],
Weber et al. [64], and Düngen et al. [84], although minor differences are observed. In Weldon’s data, at
425–550 °C the intensity around 2100–2120 cm[–1] and that of V2H6 definitely increase substantially
above their RT values, suggesting a transfer of H from multivacancies into these high-k complexes. Only
a modest increase is seen in Aspar’s data, and in Moutanabbir’s, Weber’s and Düngen’s spectra the
2100–2120 and V2H6 peaks only seem to emerge from a fading background, accompanied by a narrowing of the lines: it is by no means clear that these modes are fed by the disappearance of other defects.
Another difference is in the behaviour of V2H6 at the highest temperatures after the onset of blistering: it
disappears in Weldon’s and Düngen’s data but not in the others’; in any case its stability looks comparable to that of Si(001):H.

3.4.2 Thermal evolution of Si–H stretch modes: isothermal annealing

While isochronal annealing has been used in a majority of the fundamental studies, the simpler isothermal annealing is the technique of choice for practical applications. Moreover, it gives complementary
information on basic mechanisms. Personnic et al. [85] measured the IRAS spectrum at several times
during isothermal annealing leading to blistering. In the results, shown in Fig. 17(a), the time scale is
normalized by the total time (10 min) required for blistering at that temperature (450 °C). It is seen that a
major part of the depletion in Si–H modes takes place during the first 10% of the annealing time; the
depletion concerns essentially the multivacancy region. Let us recall that this early time corresponds to
the platelet nucleation phase, whereas the long later phase corresponds to Ostwald ripening of the platelets (Section 3.1.2). Small increases are also observed in the V2H6 and VH4 modes during the first minutes, and in the Si(001):H modes after ∼30% of the annealing time. These observations indicate that a
small fraction of the H atoms liberated by multivacancies is captured by monovacancies, and later by
internal surfaces. The conclusion that logically follows from this experiment is that the rate-limiting step
in blistering is the Ostwald ripening of the platelets (which is possibly mediated by the transport of hydrogen between the platelets). This type of experiment is promising. First, by performing several IR
measurements during the “first 10%”, the Si–H dissociation kinetics could be established with precision;
and secondly, by studying the platelet growth kinetics during the “remaining 90%” (as in Fig. 9) at several different temperatures, the activation energy for Ostwald ripening could be determined. The activa
a) b)

Fig. 17 (online colour at: www.pss-a.com) (a) IRAS spectra of Si–H stretch modes, as implanted and after annealing for 1, 3 and 5 min, corresponding to 10%, 30% and 50% of the thermal budget for fracture at 450 °C; (b) SIMS
H profiles in the same experiment; note the log scale (from Personnic et al. [85], by permission).

www.pss-a.com © 2007 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim


-----

2148 B. Terreault: Hydrogen blistering of silicon

tion energies of both the dissociation step and the Ostwald ripening step could be compared with the
effective Ea for blistering and to those of basic processes such as I, V and H diffusion and Si–Si and
Si–H bond breaking.


3.4.3 Dose dependence


The spectrum of Fig. 18 was obtained in the same conditions as that of Fig. 16, but for a subthreshold
dose, 2 × 10[16 ]H/cm[2] [4]. At low temperature, the differences between low and high doses are not blatant,
except that the LWNBB is relatively weaker at low dose, indicating less clustering of the multivacancies.
The thermal evolution also starts similarly; however, the Si(001):H complexes never really develop,
only the V2H6 emerge clearly. These facts of course reinforce the assumption that the Si(001):H associated with the platelets are the essential precursors of the blisters. (They also led to the suggestion that the
release of H atoms from the H reservoir in the multivacancies was important for eventual blistering.)
While the intensity of the LWNBB increases with dose at low dose, it saturates at very high dose. The
RSS spectra for 5 keV implantation are compared in Fig. 19 [44] for three doses: a subthreshold dose of
1 × 10[16 ]H/cm[2], a blistering dose of 2 × 10[16 ]H/cm[2] and a very high dose of 7 × 10[16 ]H/cm[2]. The high dose
spectrum is characterized by a quasi absence of sharp lines at RT, an indication of high damage, as expected; however its maximum is not at low k-values, it is right around the k = 2120 cm[–1] value characteristic of perturbed hydrogenated internal surfaces. This observation suggests that high H and damage


6

4

2

0

Si(100):H

V2H1,2 7x1016 H/cm2

2x1016 H/cm2 VH3

V2H6

1x1016 H/cm2

1800 1900 2000 2100 2200 2300


Raman shift (cm-1)

Fig. 19 Raman spectra of Si–H stretch modes at RT
for samples implanted with different doses of 5 keV H
ions (from Moutanabbir et al. [44]).


Fig. 18 IRAS spectra of Si–H stretch modes for a
sample implanted with 2 × 1016 H/cm2 at 75 keV, at
RT (i), and after annealing for 30 min at 300 °C (ii),
425 °C (iii), 500 °C (iv), 550 °C (v) and 650 °C (vi)
(from Chabal et al. [76], by permission).


© 2007 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim www.pss-a.com


-----

phys. stat. sol. (a) 204, No. 7 (2007) 2149

densities generate conditions favourable to internal surface creation. Under annealing these complexes
would become less defective and transform into bona fide Si(100):H and V2H6 characterized by sharp
lines. Indeed at high temperature the high dose sample evolves rapidly towards the stage depicted in
Fig. 16, i.e. a pure dominance of Si(001):H and V2H6. This shows that the H reservoir of the multivacancies is not necessary for blistering and constitutes a waste of hydrogen.


3.4.4 Molecular hydrogen

Contrary to IRAS, RSS can detect H2 molecules. Three stretch modes are known, gaseous H2 at 4158 cm[–1],
H2 in the interstitial Td site at 3601 cm[–1] [23, 86] and H2 in multivacancies such as V2, V6 and V10 at
3820 cm[–1] [82, 83]. H2(Td) has never been seen in H-implanted Si, only in plasma hydrogenated Si [86],
likely because there are stronger traps such as dangling bonds in implanted Si [53]. Both Aspar et al. [11]
and Düngen et al. [84] succeeded in detecting gaseous H2 by focusing their exciting laser microbeam
precisely on blisters, see Fig. 20(a). However, they failed to see it in the spaces between blisters or at low
or intermediate temperature. It is thus natural to interpret this line as due to gas filling the blister cavities.
As for the “Vn(3820)” complex, it has been clearly identified at RT by Weber et al. [64], Düngen et al.

[84] and Moutanabbir et al. [71]. Actually, Kilanov et al. [79] have quantified their IRAS data in terms of
absolute numbers of H atoms and they claim that the Si–H absorbance accounts for only 60–70% of the
implant dose, the rest presumably being in the form of H2 in multivacancies. Both Düngen and Moutanabbir also studied the thermal behaviour of the Vn(3820) complex, as shown in Fig. 20(b). We see that
the H2 in Vn’s disappears above 200 °C, in agreement with Ref. [83], and consistent with the disappearance of the multivacancy defects in the Si–H Raman modes. Therefore it has nothing to do, at least directly, with the H2 that pressurizes the blisters that show up at quite higher temperature.


**300** **oC**

**H2(MV)**

**200** **oC**

**100** **oC**

**RT**


3500 3700 3900 4100 4300 4500

a) **-1**

**H-H Raman Shift [cm** **]** b) b)


**Blister**


**4100** **4150** **4200** **4250** **4300**

**Wave number (cm-1)**


Fig. 20 (online colour at: www.pss-a.com) Raman spectra of H2 stretch modes: (a) the top curve shows
the Raman line of gaseous H2 at 4158 cm[–1] when the laser microbeam is focused on a blister, while the
bottom curve shows no line when the beam is focused elsewhere (from Aspar et al. [11], by permission);
(b) 3820 cm–1 line of H2 in multivacancies as implanted and after annealing at the indicated temperatures
(from Moutanabbir et al. [71]).

www.pss-a.com © 2007 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim


-----

2150 B. Terreault: Hydrogen blistering of silicon


0,570

0,545

0,540

0,535

0,530

100 nm

RT
3000C

3500C

4000C

4500C

5000C

5500C

0 5 10 15


Fig. 21 S-parameter as a function of positron energy for
2 × 1016 H/cm2 at 5 keV, at RT and after annealing as indicated; the relation between e+ energy and depth is not linear,

a 100 nm marker is shown (from Moutanabbir et al. [71]).


positron energy (keV)

3.5 Open volume evolution probed by positron annihilation spectroscopy


In positron (e[+]) annihilation spectroscopy (PAS), the line shape of the γ-ray is determined by the electron
momentum distribution. In regions distant from atomic nuclei, such as vacancies or voids, the line has no
high momentum tail. The S-parameter is a mathematical measure of the sharpness of the line, so it takes
higher values in vacancies and cavities. For instance, the silicon divacancy yields an S-parameter of
1.045 times the value of virgin silicon [87]. By varying the incident e[+] energy, its penetration depth is
changed, and a depth profile of cavities can be deconvoluted. The early work of Brusa et al. [88], although it was carried at a subthreshold dose, nevertheless revealed an important fact for the interpretation
of PAS spectra, namely that the S-parameter of H-passivated vacancies reverts to virgin-like values, so
they are practically PAS-invisible. With pulsed beams, the positronium lifetimes can also be measured
and Fujinami et al. [89] showed that cavities display longer lifetimes.
Figure 21 shows PAS spectra of the S-parameter vs. the e[+] energy from a recent study at a blistering
dose [71]. At high e[+] energy (large depth), the expected well-known value for virgin Si is obtained. In the
implanted region (∼100 nm) an enhancement is observed, indicating the presence of cavities already at
RT. At 300 °C, the PAS signal has increased in intensity and more strongly so at 350 °C, consistent with
an increase in cavity volume. It dips slightly at 400 °C, which may be rationalized by the final collapse of the multivacancies and/or a capture of H by cavities, because H adsorption will reduce the
S-parameter, as mentioned. Finally, at and above 450 °C, the S-parameter increases rapidly, in accord
with the growth of the blisters. The peak S value obtained at 550 °C is ∼1.05 times larger than the value
for virgin silicon, which imposes a lower limit on the size of the positron-trapping defects of at least
4 vacancies. However it is likely that the positron trapping defect is larger than V4, since the measured
value of S = 1.05 represents a weighted average of trapped and untrapped positrons. Another feature of
interest is that the depth of the peak shifts in a way similar to the RBS/C peaks (Section 3.3.2). At 300 °C
it is deeper than at RT, then it moves towards the surface at 350 °C, then deeper again at 400–450 °C,
and finally back towards the surface at 500–550 °C. This may seem erratic but the “shallow peak” is

Table 2 Temperatures of occurrence of shifts in depths of peak values of RBS/C yield or void volume
measured by the S-parameter [71].


quantity temperature range

shift in depth ∼strong shift to surface


RBS peak yield 300 to >400 °C ∼600 °C

S-parameter peak 300–450 °C >500 °C

© 2007 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim www.pss-a.com


-----

phys. stat. sol. (a) 204, No. 7 (2007) 2151

Table 3 Values of the perpendicular tensile strain ε found in different experiments; either the maximum
value at the peak is given, or else an average value.


ion energy <implant H dose ε (%)
(keV) <temperature (10[16] /cm[2])

RT high temperature


Ref.


15.5 <100 °C 2.0 0.5 (max) – [65]

15.5 <LN2 1.6 0.5 (av) 1.2 (300 °C) [58]
0.5 (500 °C)

40 <LN2 5.0 0.65 (max) – [91]
40 <RT 5.0 1.25 (max) – [91]
42 <LN2 3.0 0.35 (max) – [90]
64.5 <RT 5.0 0.033 (rms) 0.053 (500 °C) [64]
76 <RT 8.0 2.9 (max) “weak” (350 °C) [92]

always associated with higher S values. The shifts are summarized in Table 2. The shifts in depth at
intermediate temperature are interpreted as a move of the void volume from multivacancies to the platelets. The “larger cavities” (>V4) only show up at ∼475–500 °C and their shift towards the surface together with the shift in the RBS/C profile identifies them with blistering.

3.6 Stress and strain

The presence of cavities is expected to be accompanied by an in-plane stress, σ, and a perpendicular
strain, ε. Strain measurements have been done using X-ray diffraction [64, 65, 90–92], and large angle
convergent beam electron diffraction (LACBED) [58]. In some cases, an ε profile was obtained from
these data, in other cases an average value only. From the ε values, an in-plane stress could be deduced,
using the standard values of Young’s modulus and Poisson’s ratio for Si. The depth-integrated or average stress has also been obtained by the thin sample curvature method [40, 52]. While all agree on the
existence and the sign of the strain or stress, there is a rather wide range of absolute values in the literature: this is shown in Tables 3 (strain) and 4 (stress). One can surmise that the deconvolution of absolute
strain values is fraught with difficulties, but we will continue the discussion assuming that relative values
within the data of one group using the same apparatus in similar conditions are at least qualitatively instructive.

Table 4 Values of the in-plane compressive stress σ found in different experiments; either the maximum
value at the peak is given, or else an average value.


ion energy implant H dose σ (MPa)
(keV) temperature (10[16] /cm[2])
RT high temperature


Ref.


15.5 LN2 1.6 1000 (max) 3000 (300 °C) [58]
1000 (500 °C)

40 LN2 7.0 325 (av) – [40]
10.0 100 (av) –

40 RT 8.0 225 (av) – [52]
64.5 RT 5.0 60 (rms) 10 (500 °C) [64]
76 RT 8.0 1900 (max) “weak” (350 °C) [92]

www.pss-a.com © 2007 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim


-----

2152 B. Terreault: Hydrogen blistering of silicon

3.6.1 Effect of temperature


Inspection of the strain data of Refs. [90, 91] in Table 3 shows that (i) the strain increases with dose, and
(ii) it increases markedly with the implantation temperature. In fact, as shown by Lee et al. [91], the
strain depth distribution follows precisely the trend of the displacement damage (Section 3.3): both distributions are considerably more peaked for RT implantation than for cryogenic implantation. This suggests a close connection between the strain and whatever defects cause the backscattering. Moreover, the
results of Tables 3 and 4 show that, around 300 °C, at the same time as the defects observable by TEM,
RBS/C or IR spectroscopy start evolving, the stress and the strain increase, showing again the connection
between stress/strain and the huge enhancement in RBS/C yield. When the blisters appear at somewhat
higher temperature, the stress is expectedly relieved, though not entirely; this behaviour is again similar
to the RBS/C evolution (Figs. 13 and 14). These facts are of great importance concerning the stress and
strain but they are based on few data unfortunately.
The power of LACBED is that the defect concentration and the relaxation volume around these defects can be deduced from the 2-D intensity maps of the Bragg contours. Using LACBED measurements,
Frabboni [58] calculated the product of these two quantities, which gives the total defect “volume”. This
is displayed in Fig. 22 (converted in our units), together with the RBS/C data obtained at the same ion
energy and dose [53] (which is part of the data of Fig. 14). One can see that, with increasing temperature,
as the defect relaxation volume (a) increases, the defect concentration (b) decreases. Note that the increase in the relaxation volume can be simply due to an increase in H2 contents and the concomitant
pressure enhancement, rather than to a growth in the size of the clusters themselves. The total defect
volume (c) has a maximum at 300 °C and then decreases at higher temperature. We are now familiar
with this type of temperature dependence: it is very similar to the backscattering yield (d). In addition,
Frabboni points out that the defects are too numerous and too small to be platelets, and too large to be
interstitials; he assumes the defects to be H2 pressurized vacancy clusters.


40

30


0,5


20

10


2,0

1,5

1,0


0 100 200 300 400 500 600


100 200 300 400 500

(a) defect

(b) defect

relaxation 0,4

concentration

volume

0,3

0,2

C (at.%)

0,1

0,0

16

(c) total

(d) RBS/C

defect

yield

volume 12

8

RBS/random 4

0

anneal temperature (0C)


anneal temperature (0C)


Fig. 22 Defect relaxation volume normalized to atomic volume (a), defect density normalized to atomic
density (b), defect volume as % of total (c), and maximum RBS/C yield as % of random yield (d), for
1.6 × 1016 H/cm2 at 15.5 keV (adapted from Frabboni [58] and Cerofolini et al. [55]).

© 2007 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim www.pss-a.com


-----

phys. stat. sol. (a) 204, No. 7 (2007) 2153


Fig. 23 In-plane compressive stresses measured by the
wafer curvature method as a function of implanted dose
and crystal orientation at 40 keV. The labels RT and LN2
refer to the RT implants of Zheng et al. [52] and the cryogenic implants of Höchbauer et al. [40].


500

400


300

200


100


RT (110)

RT (111)

(001)LN2

RT (001)


10


H Dose (1016/cm2)

3.6.2 Dose and crystal orientation effects


The dose and orientation dependences of the RT stress were studied by Höchbauer et al. [40] and Zheng
et al. [52], both at 40 keV. Figure 23 is a compilation of their measurements. The stress increases and
then saturates at increasing dose; and one of the experiments gives a drastic reduction of σ for doses
above 7 × 10[16 ]H/cm[2]. The difference in implantation temperatures (RT for Zheng, LN2 for Höchbauer)
possibly explains the difference in the two data sets for Si(001), both obtained by the same method in the
same laboratory. Unfortunately, this interesting result is based on a single datum, but it correlates with
other evidence that will be discussed in the next section. The figure also shows that the stress depends
markedly on the crystal orientation, the ordering being σ(110) > σ(111) > σ(001). This is the order of the
mechanical bond strengths at intermediate temperature (Section 2.2), and the inverse order of the kinetics
of splitting (Section 2.3). Zheng et al. hypothesize that the lower stress for Si(001) is due to the higher
abundance of platelets, which leads to stress relief. A somewhat different ordering was found in another
strain measurement, using X-rays, namely ε(111) > ε(110) > ε(001) [92]. The authors explain it in terms
of bond angles: the smaller the angle between the bond direction (always {111}) and the interface normal (〈111〉, 〈110〉, or 〈001〉), the higher the strain.
It is worth noting at this point that while platelet formation, stress and strain, and “ease of blistering”
vary substantially depending on crystal orientation, on the contrary the defects measured by either IR
spectroscopy or backscattering/channelling are qualitatively and quantitatively similar whatever the
orientation [52].

3.7 Spatial correlations; the depth of splitting


Several authors have noted unsurprising similarities in the depth distributions of H, of “damage” measured by RBS/C, of platelets, of positron annihilation and of strain, and in the depth at which the substrate
splits, either by blistering or ion-cutting. The Los Alamos group has endeavoured to put these similarities
on a quantitative basis [40, 67, 68, 70, 90, 91]. It was first found in Ref. [67] that, in their conditions
(5 × 10[16] H/cm[2] at 175 keV), the depth of splitting coincided precisely with the peak in the backscattering
yield and not to the peak in H concentration, which is ~7% deeper; the cut was not at the center of the
platelet distribution either. Further work [90] investigated also the strain distribution, using a subthreshold dose of 3 × 10[16] H/cm[2] at 42 keV. The results are shown in Fig. 24. Displacement density, strain and
platelets all peak at the same depth within 10 nm, some 50 nm shallower that the peak in H. We notice
that the strain profile is narrower that the displacement profile, and the platelet profile even narrower.
That last fact is understandable, since platelets are suspected to require a minimum H concentration, their
distribution is a sort of convolution of the damage and H distribution. For the strain it is not as clear but
it could indicate an influence of the hydrogen, as claimed by others [53, 58].

www.pss-a.com © 2007 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim


-----

2154 B. Terreault: Hydrogen blistering of silicon


Fig. 24 Depth distributions of H (dotted line),
atomic displacements (solid line), strain (dashed
line), and platelets (histogram), for 3 × 1016 H/cm2

at 42 keV (from Nastasi et al. [90] by permission).


4000

3000


2000

1000


H-platelet
distribution H-distribution

[arb. unit] [arb. unit]


300 400 500


Depth [nm]

On the basis of their observations, Nastasi et al. argue that mobile vacancies are drawn into the region
of maximum perpendicular tensile strain (and in-plane compressive stress) and so facilitate platelet nucleation and growth. Moreover these processes are favoured energetically as we saw in Eq. (3). Since H
capture by platelets, either adsorbed on the walls or in the gas phase, is exothermal, H atoms are drawn
into the platelets. Growing platelets are thus fed with hydrogen. At high temperature, these processes are
presumably accelerated and the pressure drives crack formation and blistering. Unfortunately, the thermal evolution of the strain profiles was not investigated to confirm this picture. In their model, the compressive stress is assumed to be due to the same defects that are responsible for the displacement field. It
is argued very sensibly that these defects have to be clusters, but also that they are unrelated to hydrogen.
This is opposite to the view of Cerofolini [53] and Frabboni [58]. It is indeed hard to understand how
clusters unrelated to H would be so abundant and cause such a high backscattering yield, when He implantation produces so little damage. Moreover, the huge increase in the displacement field at intermediate temperature is even more difficult to understand in this framework, particularly as we see the multivacancies and the interstitial defects disappearing in the IR spectra. So, the question of the displacement
field, its origin, and its role in blistering is still perplexing.
A different situation arises at very high dose. For instance, for 1 × 10[17] H/cm[2] at 40 keV, microcracking occurs at the peak of the H distribution; and for 7 × 10[16] H/cm[2], microcracks can be observed at both
the peak in backscattering yield and the peak in H [40]. This is nicely illustrated in Fig. 10. This TEM
observation and similar ones for 5 × 10[16] and 1 × 10[17] H/cm[2] are confirmed by AFM line scans in the
craters of ruptured blisters. Let us recall that the authors had found (Fig. 23) the maximum in the stress at
7 × 10[16] H/cm[2] and a strong reduction for 1 × 10[17] H/cm[2]. They suppose the stress relief to have proceeded by radiation-enhanced defect migration, which would naturally occur above a certain defect concentration. With a lower stress, the mechanism described in the preceding section would be less powerful
of course and splitting could occur at the depth of the H maximum, the more so since the H concentration is very high. Actually, contrary to low dose, for 1 × 10[17] H/cm[2] the platelet depth distribution becomes very wide and it shows two peaks, one located at the peak in H and the other somewhat shallower
than the peak in RBS/C-damage (Fig. 25) [68]. Since the shift in splitting depth is already initiated at
7 × 10[16] H/cm[2], for which the stress is maximum, another factor must also intervene. Höchbauer et al.

[40] hypothesize that it is an enhancement in fracture toughness at high damage levels [93] which prevents microcracking at the peak damage depth.


3.8 The Elusive hydrogen

The question to be addressed here is probably the most puzzling one in relation with the evolution of
implanted hydrogen. It deserves a careful and exhaustive examination, which is not straightforward be

© 2007 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim www.pss-a.com


-----

phys. stat. sol. (a) 204, No. 7 (2007) 2155


Fig. 25 Histogram (shaded) of the depth distribution of
platelets at high dose: 1 × 1017 H/cm2 at 50 keV; the damage and H depth profiles are also shown (from Höchbauer
et al. [68], by permission).


100

50


Ion-Cut location

Damage

H-concentration


300 400 500 600

cause the evidence comes from different experiments with, e.g. different H doses and different annealing
protocols. We saw in Section 3.4.1 that the Si–H modes, especially the low-k ones, start disappearing
progressively above 250 °C, while the total H contents measured by IBA (Section 3.2) or thermal desorption spectrometry (Section 2.3.2) remain high up to >400 °C. In isothermal annealing, more than
half of the low-k Si–H are lost during the first 10% of the annealing time (Section 3.4.2). We show in
Fig. 26 the quantitative comparison made between the integrated amount of bound H measured by IRAS
of Si–H modes and the net H retention measured by ERD [76]. ERD, like other IBA techniques, is the
least prone to artefacts, but very similar results were obtained using RSS and TDS [44]. The Si–H depletion at relatively low temperature (or in the first few minutes under isothermal annealing) is confirmed
by Refs. [41, 64, 80, 81, 84, 85], and the nearly total retention, almost until blisters appear, is also confirmed by NRA [42] and ERD [66]. To that bound H must be added the H2 molecules trapped in multivacancies, which also disappear at relatively low temperature [71, 84]. It has been generally assumed that
the freed H took the form of IRAS-invisible H2 [4]. This H2 could be for instance at the source of the
displacement field through the stress or pressure it would necessarily cause [53].
The problem with the above assumption is that those H2 molecules are nowhere to be seen until quite
higher temperature. To demonstrate this without using disparate experiments, the data of Düngen et al.

[84] are shown in Fig. 27. We see that the low-k multivacancies (MV’s) start to decrease at 350 °C, that
the 3628 cm[–1] line of H2 in MV’s also vanishes at 350 °C, but that the 4162 cm[–1] line of gaseous H2 does

Fig. 26 Comparison of integrated bound hydrogen (Si–H
stretch modes) with total H retention measured by ERD (here
called FRS), for 6 × 1016 H/cm2 at 75 keV (from Chabal et al.

[76]).

www.pss-a.com © 2007 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim


-----

2156 B. Terreault: Hydrogen blistering of silicon

Fig. 27 Raman spectra in both the Si–H (1800–2300 cm[–1]) and H2 (3700–4200 cm[–1]) stretch mode regions, at RT and after annealing at different temperatures for 10 min (from Düngen et al. [84]).

not show up until 600 °C when blistering is fully developed. Therefore, in the crucial phase from around
250–350 °C (depending on dose and annealing protocol), until blistering above ~450–550 °C, a large
amount of hydrogen cannot be found, whether bound to Si or as H2. It must exist in a Raman-invisible
form. This is the mystery of the elusive hydrogen.
Two experimental artefacts could be invoked to explain away this paradox. First, all the reported IR
measurements were carried out at RT, after cooling the samples down from whatever temperature they
had been annealed at. But Ma et al. [94] have shown that some Si–H bonds (specifically Si–H on internal surfaces of {111} platelets) may reform upon cooling down. Therefore RT IR measurements are
unreliable as a measure of the true state of annealed samples. However, if something similar has happened in the reported experiments, it will only make the discrepancy worse. (Actually, the results of Ma
et al. may constitute an instance of elusive hydrogen because it is by no means clear that the H lost by
Si–H modes is quantitatively accounted for by other modes.) The second possible explanation is that the
“lost H” would have simply migrated beyond the depth accessible to the Raman laser beam. However, in
the case of the 5 keV implantations [81], the mean H implant depth is only 75 nm whereas the laser

© 2007 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim www.pss-a.com


-----

phys. stat. sol. (a) 204, No. 7 (2007) 2157

penetration depth is ~500 nm. As for the other cases, H migration in depth has never been observed at
any temperature by IBA [42, 66] or SIMS, see next.
During the isothermal annealing experiment reported in Section 3.4.2, Personnic et al. [85] measured
the H depth profiles by SIMS and found them to be also depleted (Fig. 17(b)), and at the same rate as the
Si–H bonds measured by IRAS (Fig. 17(a)): After 10% of the annealing time, the H profiles are depleted
not only on the surface side as found by IBA (Section 3.2), but are also depleted by a factor of ~1/2 at
the peak. As annealing is pursued, they are further depleted uniformly. At no time is there a sign of migration in depth; this is important because SIMS is sensitive to very low H concentrations (<0.1 at%).
The authors assume that dissociation of Si–H “results in the formation of H2 that is not directly detectable by SIMS”. The question arises whether the “lost H” could become visible using a beam ion (Ar[+],
Cs[+], O−2?) and/or detected ion (H+, H−, H+2, H−2, SiH+?) different from whatever unspecified ions were used
in that work. If such a combination were found, it could give hints concerning the chemical state of the
elusive hydrogen.


3.9 Temperature correlations; blistering scenarios

Figure 28 is intended to summarize the thermal evolution of the various quantities discussed above during either isochronal or isothermal annealing. The labels are explained in the caption. The so-called low-k
and high-k IR modes are defined as those with k < 2050 cm[–1] and k > 2050 cm[–1], respectively [4, 81]. The
curves are taken from different real data but sometimes interpolated or smoothed. They are intentionally
qualitative because: (i) the anneal times vary from ~20 min to 2 h; and (ii) the doses are variable, though
all are relatively close (below or above) the blistering threshold. The curves are normalized to the maximum value reached by the corresponding quantity. A few generalizations can be made with reasonable
certainty.
– At RT, most H is bound to Si dangling bonds and the majority of the defects are of the vacancy or
cavity type including (001) platelets; there is also H2 in large multivacancies. Atomic displacements and
strain are already present at a level that implies major roles for H and H2 in stabilizing the defects (certainly), and straining the crystal (probably), an effect at the source of the greater part of the displacement
field.
– Between 200 and 300 °C (or in the first minutes in isochronal annealing), the various defects, especially those of the multivacancy type, start releasing H and H2, the major part of which is retained in the
sample but is curiously invisible by Raman scattering or SIMS. At the same time, the strain, the displacement field and the cavity volume start increasing, maybe not all at the same rate; however all three
eventually reach similar levels of enhancement in comparison with their RT value: This is probably not a

disp Fig. 28 Schematic evolution under annealing as a

function of temperature or time (% of blistering time):

normalized value IR-hi-k total H retention (Htot), low-k and high-k Si–H IR

H2-MV H2-g Htot cancies (Hmodes (IR-lo-2-MV) or gaseous (Hk, IR-hi-k), IR modes of H2-g), atomic displace-2 in multivaIR-lo-k ment density (disp), perpendicular strain (ε), and S-pa
rameter (S).

blistering starts

ε S

disp

IR-hi-k

H2-MV H2-g Htot
IR-lo-k

~250 0C ~450 0C temperature
~10% 100% or % time


www.pss-a.com © 2007 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim


-----

2158 B. Terreault: Hydrogen blistering of silicon

coincidence. The circumstantial evidence therefore indicates that a vacancy-type defect (S-parameter)
starts to grow; it involves hydrogen in a so far unknown form (IR), and this H presence causes a strong
deformation of the lattice (ε), and strong backscattering (disp) and dechannelling.
– At 400 to 500 °C (typically), the low-k complexes disappear. Of the high-k complexes, only the
internal (001) surfaces and V2H6 remain, but they contain no more than 20% of the H. Blisters appear,
together with gaseous H2, and the cavity volume keeps increasing as the blisters grow. The strain is relaxed and the displacement field weakens. H2 starts to desorb out in abundance.
The nature of the complex that retains H and causes the strain at intermediate temperature is puzzling.
Platelets are not likely culprits for two reasons. First, cavities do not by themselves cause hard collisions
because no lattice atom is displaced into a channel; in addition, the TEM work shows little strain around
the platelets. Second, their Ostwald-type growth at high temperature should reduce the strain in the implanted layer instead of increasing it (Eq. (3) in Section 3.1.2). The responsible complex must be hydrogen-related, must be so small that it is unrecognized by TEM, and must cause localized strain regions.
Authors of TEM work speak of “heavily damaged regions” [4, 40, 68], faulted loops [11, 41, 66], or a
high density (10[12] cm[–2]) of small (3 nm) defect clusters [58], but cannot be more specific. Cerofolini [61]
has proposed assemblies of a few molecules trapped in vacancies or small vacancy clusters: they would
certainly produce pressure and strain but why is the H2 Raman- and SIMS-invisible? He further hypothesized that these structures are the blister precursors, rather than the platelets. However, the role of the
platelets can hardly be denied in view of all the links between platelets and blisters, e.g. the coincidence
between the peak in the platelet distribution and the depth of splitting, and also the obvious facilitating
effect of the shape and orientation of the platelets.

4 Insights obtained using hydrogen engineering

4.1 Implantation temperature optimization

Implantation at LN2 temperature [65] or –140 °C [70] strongly reduces both the displacement and the
dechannelling damage observed afterwards at RT. Therefore annealing up to RT temperature after cryogenic implantation is not as effective in nucleating the relevant defect complexes as irradiating at RT,
which clearly indicates the importance of “hot” defects (dynamic annealing). Frabboni [58] noted that no
platelets were nucleated yet if the implantation was carried out at LN2 temperature, but this did not
change the final outcome after annealing. However, Lee et al. [70] noted a shallower and broader displacement profile with cryogenic implantation, and several other differences finally giving thinner and
rougher transferred layers in ion-cutting. Moreover, implantation at –140 °C gave an IR spectrum that
was shifted towards low-k values, i.e. having more H*2[, multivacancy and interstitial defects, fewer VH]4
and V2H6, and no hint of Si(001):H [70]. In other words, low temperature implantation unsurprisingly
has an effect that is the opposite of that of high temperature annealing, and its practical interest is thus
limited.
It is then natural to surmise that implantation at higher than room temperature could be beneficial, but
there have actually been few attempts at optimizing blistering or ion-cutting in this fashion. There is first
the surprising result of Tong et al. [95]. They implanted the H ions at the high temperature of 400 °C,
without causing any blistering, and then annealed the samples at different temperatures, including temperatures lower than 400 °C, until they blistered. True, blistering at 350 °C took ~25 hours, but at 400 °C
it took only a modest ~100 minutes. It is unfortunate that the implantation time is not given in the paper.
Another surprise is that the high temperature implantation did not speed up the rest of the process, the
activation energy remained at a value of 2 eV for a dose of 7 × 10[16] H/cm[2], in line with the results of
Fig. 6.
Holland et al. [96] found for their part that the blistering dose could be minimized. By implanting at
350 °C and annealing at 450 °C, they only found a modest reduction in the threshold from
4.1 × 10[16] H/cm[2] to 3.5 × 10[16] H/cm[2]. But they also discovered that, if they first carried out a high temperature implantation of a subthreshold dose, followed by a RT implantation, the total required dose

© 2007 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim www.pss-a.com


-----

phys. stat. sol. (a) 204, No. 7 (2007) 2159


Fig. 29 Dose threshold (critical dose) for
blistering under 30 min 450 °C annealling
when the sample is implanted in two steps,
first at 350 °C, then at RT, as a function of the
initial dose (40 keV, from Holland et al. [96],
by permission).


Fig. 30 Displacement concentration profiles (note the
log scale) after a RT implant (line), a 350 °C implant
(dots) and a 350 °C anneal of a RT implant (triangles)
(from Holland et al. [96], by permission).


could be cut by as much as 1/3 (Fig. 29). One can suppose that the high temperature implantation “prepares the ground” by generating platelets or microcracks which efficiently trap the subsequently implanted H ions. This assumption is supported by RBS/C measurements (Fig. 30): They show a more
intense displacement field at high temperature, consistent with the reverse annealing effect (Section 3.3.2), a well known forerunner of blistering. The backscattering yield is even higher than for RT
implantation followed by annealing, a fact that is again consistent with the importance of dynamic annealing. The reason why a two step implantation is more effective than a single step high temperature
one may be that the high temperature diffusivity of hydrogen is too high and results in premature H2
release. One worry is that the higher RBS/C “damage” may result in poorer quality ion-cut wafers. The
study of that question and further attempts at engineering the implantation temperature scheme are certainly warranted.

4.2 Effect of dopants

Hydrogen can react with dopants; the Fermi level determines the charge state of H in Si and strongly
influences its diffusivity [20–22]. Therefore, it is of interest to elucidate the effects of doping on blistering, especially as heavy doping is used more and more in order to produce high conductivity regions.
Concerning n-type doping, one can be brief, somewhat surprisingly it has no effect on blistering dose or
temperature, except for a peculiar compensation effect that will be discussed below. On the other hand,
boron doping has profound effects.

4.2.1 Boron facilitation of blistering

The presence of boron at high concentration reduces both the threshold dose and the minimum anneal
temperature required for blistering, an attractive example of hydrogen engineering. Tong et al. [97] first
reported that Si wafers uniformly doped at the level of 2 × 10[20] B/cm[3] display 10 times faster blistering
kinetics than undoped or n-type Si, but with the activation energy unchanged (Ea = 1.2 eV for
1 × 10[17] H/cm[2]). This is illustrated in Fig. 31. Alternatively, different B ion doses were implanted in
undoped Si prior to H ion implantation. For B doses above 10[15] B/cm[2], the blistering temperature was
reduced from 340 °C to 280 °C. Very intriguingly, the effect was 50% weaker if the boron was electrically activated by high temperature annealing prior to H ion implantation. Similarly, in heavily B-doped

www.pss-a.com © 2007 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim


-----

2160 B. Terreault: Hydrogen blistering of silicon

Fig. 31 Arrhenius plot of the blistering time vs.
the inverse absolute temperature for uniformly
doped Si wafers, with P or B concentrations as
indicated (from Tong et al. [97], by permission).

Si (0.001–0.002 Ω cm), Desrosiers et al. [98] observed reductions in the blistering threshold from
1.75 × 10[16] H/cm[2] to 1.0 × 10[16] H/cm[2] and in the blistering temperature from 475 °C to 350 °C; consistent with the faster evolution of the implanted H, they found H2 to start desorbing at as low a temperature
as 225 °C. Kilanov et al. [79] carried out an innovative experiment: by epitaxy they deposited a B “delta
layer” (6 × 10[14] B/cm[2]) on Si, followed by 500 nm of undoped Si on top. They then implanted H at
50 keV so that the H peak coincided with the B delta layer. They found a 100× faster blistering and a
reduction in Ea from 1.3 to 0.8 eV (suggesting a switch from the “low temperature” to the “high temperature” regime, see Fig. 6). They also state that the blisters were smaller but more numerous, implying a
higher density of nucleation sites and also a higher pressure (Eq. (2), Section 2.2). The Kilanov experiment shows that a highly localized B layer and/or an interface is particularly effective in blistering facilitation. A beginning of an explanation for the preceeding observations is a change in the mechanical
strength of the implanted layer (Section 2.2), which starts to drop at ~200 °C with B doping, instead of
~280 °C without B [49]. In contrast, B ion implantation after H implantation leads to an exactly opposite
effect on the strength, and an increase in the blistering temperature [99]. This last observation suggests
that the defects generated by the passage of the B ions destroy the complexes of the “right” kind (described in Section 3) that are necessary for blistering.

4.2.2 Behaviour of H-related defects in B-doped Si

The presence of boron enhances platelet formation. Tong et al. [97] found by TEM more (001) platelets
and fewer of the {111} type. Kilanov et al. [79] observed a quasi continuous narrow layer of microcracks
at the B delta-layer depth after annealing for 2 h at 200 °C only, whereas without B-layer only a wide
region of scattered microcracks was found. Several authors [49, 79, 100–103] reported that B doping
reduced the atomic displacement density measured by RBS/C. An example is shown in Fig. 32 [101].
Here different B ion doses were implanted in p-type Si samples and diffused in at 1075 °C for 100 min,
giving B doping concentrations in the range 1–9 × 10[19] B/cm[3]. Then 4.5 × 10[16] H/cm[2] was implanted.
We observe that the number of displacements is reduced at the H implant depth for B concentrations
≥3 × 10[19] cm[–3]. On the other hand, the RBS/C yield in the surface layer above the H-implanted region
increases instead. Giving the usual interpretation to the RBS/C yield in that region, namely a macroscopic deformation of the lattice (Section 3.3.2), this demonstrates that B doping promotes the formation
of blister precursors. The corresponding maximum strain is estimated as 0.7% [101]. Moreover, Lee
et al. [103] showed that when the boron is not activated after implantation the reduction in backscattering
is even more significant (and as we saw blistering is even more strongly favoured). Similar observations
have been made by Henttinen [49]; in addition, they found there was no reduction in backscattering in

© 2007 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim www.pss-a.com


-----

phys. stat. sol. (a) 204, No. 7 (2007) 2161


4x10

3x10


Fig. 32 Comparison of the backscattering spectra of
H-implanted Si for different B concentrations: damage peak around channel 60 and near-surface deformation in channels 90–150 (from Popov et al. [101],
by permission).


2x10

1x10


Cz-Si, <100>,

Random

H+, 67.5 keV,

4.5*1016 cm-2:
boron concentration:

1*1015 cm-3

1*1019 cm-3

3*1019 cm-3

6*1019 cm-3

9*1019 cm-3


100 200 300

Channels

compensated samples heavily doped with both As and B. Finally, when B is implanted after H implantation, the damage profile is much more intense than with H alone or B alone [99]. The width of the profile
looks like that of the boron primary defect production profile and indicates that an abnormally large
fraction of the primary defects survive. This effect can only be due to the presence of the previously
implanted H, which captures and stabilizes the B-ion-induced point defects. In the process, the blisterprecursor complexes are destroyed.
Desrosiers et al. [98] found very different Raman spectra in heavily B-doped wafers, compared to
undoped or Sb-doped Si, see Fig. 33. The low wave number modes, characteristic of multivacancies and
interstitial defects, are much weaker in B-doped Si. Moreover, these low-k modes disappear at much
lower temperature, i.e. ~200 °C instead of 300 °C with H alone, and the evolution towards the typical
blistering configuration of dominance by Si(001):H and V2H6 is much more rapid. These results thus
provide additional evidence that the important defects are those with a high ratio of H per vacancy. Another feature of the Raman spectrum that is equally noteworthy is the absence of any B–H line. This is in
contrast with plasma-hydrogenated B-doped Si, in which there is a very conspicuous line at 1870 cm[–1]

[104], due to the stretch vibration of H trapped in a bond-middle site (slightly off the bond-center), between a Si atom and a substitutional B atom (Bsub). This absence in implanted B-doped Si indicates either
that other traps are much more attractive or possibly that there are few substitutional B atoms available,
see next.


Fig. 33 Si–H stretch mode region of Raman spectra of Si after H
ion implantation and annealing at the indicated temperatures:
2 × 10[16] H/cm[2] in undoped Si (a); 1.5 × 10[16] H/cm[2] in B-doped
10[–3] Ω cm Si (b). (From Desrosiers et al. [98].)


**(a) undopedRT** V2H1,2

200 oC Si(001):H VH3/V2H6

300 oC

470 oC VH4

VH4

**(b) B-doped**

RT
200°C
400°C


1800 1900 2000 2100 2200 2300


Raman Shift (cm-1)

www.pss-a.com © 2007 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim


-----

2162 B. Terreault: Hydrogen blistering of silicon

4.2.3 B atom lattice location; the structure of irradiated B-doped Si

Some hints as to how boron can have such baffling effects on defect development and ultimately on
blistering may be found in the atomic level structure of irradiated B-doped Si. The Catania group [105]
has discovered a particular mechanism which operates in B-doped Si under any type of irradiation including H and B implantation. The excess self-interstitials (SI’s) quickly latch onto the Bsub atoms with a
binding energy of 0.9 eV (favoured by the small atomic radius of B, 0.117 nm, compared to Si,
0.146 nm). In this state, the B atom is mobile and upon encountering another Bsub (the distance between
B atoms is only ~2 nm in highly doped Si), it forms a stable and immobile B–B complex. It has been
determined that essentially all the B is incorporated into such structures as soon as the SI fluence reaches
a few 10[16] SI/cm[2]. Since H ions of tens of keV produce ~10 SI/ion [43], the critical SI fluence is largely
exceeded for blistering doses. It is important to note that this structure is also that of B-implanted Si
before activation annealing. Thus H-implanted B-doped Si is deactivated and its structure not so different
from that of B-implanted, non-activated Si.
Moreover, the lattice location of the B atoms in these complexes has been determined by measuring
the yield of the [11]B(p,α)[8]Be reaction induced by protons channelled in 〈001〉 and 〈110〉 axial directions.
Figure 34 [106] displays the channelling angular scans for both proton-irradiated B-doped Si () and for
B-implanted Si (). One can see, first, that both channels display considerably increased yields (, ) in
the middle of the channels, compared to unirradiated activated B-doped Si () or to the silicon backscattering yield (). This demonstrates a strong presence of B interstitials in the channels; actually, essentially all the B atoms are so displaced. Secondly, there is little difference in yield between H ion irradiation of (previously activated) B-doped Si () and B implantation in undoped Si (). Thirdly, the yields in
the middle of the 〈001〉 and 〈110〉 channels reach ~65% and 50% respectively. Detailed analysis of the
curves shows that they are consistent with the two B atoms being aligned along [100] directions in classic split-interstitial fashion. The 65% level (~2/3) indicates that those B–B pairs aligned along the 〈001〉
direction are shadowed by the 〈001〉 rows of Si atoms. The annealing behaviour of these complexes is
interesting. In the case of H ion irradiation, the [11]B(p,α)[8]Be yield starts to decrease around 200 °C and is
complete at 500 °C (although the full electrical activity is only recovered at 700 °C). In the case of B ion
implantation, the yield first increases, between 400 °C and 700 °C, and only decreases at 900 °C (together
with the recovery of the B activation); this is explained as due to the high level of SI oversaturation [106].

Fig. 34 Angular scans of the yields of 11B(p,α)8Be reaction
for protons channelled along the 〈001〉 (a) and 〈110〉 (b) axes;
the elastic backscattering yields are also plotted. The symbols refer to H ion irradiated B-doped Si (), B implanted Si
(), unimplanted activated B-doped Si () and backscattering (). (From Romano et al. [106], by permission.)

© 2007 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim www.pss-a.com


-----

phys. stat. sol. (a) 204, No. 7 (2007) 2163

4.2.4 Discussion

The absence of B–H IR modes indicates that a form of chemical trapping of H by B is not likely involved in the blistering facilitation. Rather, the lattice location work suggests the hypothesis outlined in
the following. The formation of each B–B pair eliminates one SI, which is henceforth unavailable for
recombination or H atom trapping. The damage structure is thus modified, compared to undoped Si,
witness the backscattering data (Fig. 32). Moreover, the presence of the B–B split interstitials necessarily produces a compressive stress; since the B atom concentration is >10[–3] in highly doped Si, the resulting strain is probably also of order 10[–3], in any case not negligible compared to the strain without B (fraction of %, Table 3 and Section 3.6). The depth distribution of the strain is also probably modified. In
view of the demonstrated importance of the stress and strain for platelet nucleation, it is proposed that it
is the strain field resulting from the presence of the B–B pairs that is particularly conducive to the formation of platelets, to the detriment of the weakly hydrogenated multivacancies, as seen in the Raman
spectra (Fig. 33). This hypothesis could be tested by strain measurements.
This proposed mechanism brings the following remarks.
(1) The fact that the change in the damage structure outlined above modifies the backscattering yield
(Fig. 32) is not surprising but it is not self-evident that the change should be a decrease in yield. For that
purpose, one would have to understand first what is the exact source of the displacement damage in undoped Si. Then theory could perhaps be used to compute the respective RBS/C yields.
(2) If substantial effects are seen in properly activated B-doped wafers, it is because the subsequent
proton bombardment actually deactivates the boron. And the significant difference in annealing behaviour between H-irradiated B-doped Si and B-implanted Si constitutes a natural explanation for the significant difference in blistering behaviour between activated and non-activated B-doped Si.
(3) The evolution of the Si–H stretch modes at considerably lower temperature with boron implies a
lower stability for the low-k multivacancies. This is likely due to smaller clusters. If the hypothesis stated
in Section 3.9 is correct, namely that the H released by the multivacancies is responsible for the huge rise
in the backscattering yield at intermediate temperature, then a testable consequence follows: with B doping, the increase in displacements will occur at lower temperature (~200 °C) and it will be less impressive than without B doping.
(4) The apparent constancy of the blistering activation energy is more puzzling: The lower blistering
temperature then implies a purely kinetic acceleration of the process. A possible explanation is as follows. Assume the rate-limiting process in blistering is H diffusion in the presence of traps (Sections 2.3.1
and 3.4.2). The lower backscattering yield with B suggests a lower trap density and then clearly the process will be accelerated. The possible weakness in this argument is that the precise nature of the defect
that generates the displacement field is not known and it is not clear that it constitutes a trap for H.
(5) All IR studies show fewer H atoms bound to Si, and B–H bonds are not seen. Where is the missing H? Kilanov et al. assume that it is in the form of H2. But we have seen that the H2 appears to be
bound in multivacancies at RT, which are precisely the defects that are depleted with B doping. However, the H2 stretch region has not been studied by Raman scattering under B doping, and its quantification is in any case a difficult operation; it certainly deserves future work.
(6) When B is post-implanted in H-implanted undoped Si, the damage level is very high and blistering
inhibited. It must be due to the capture of either the vacancies or the self-interstitials by some of the
H-related defects present. If it is vacancy capture by vacancy clusters, that will give an observable enhancement in the low-k IR modes. If it is SI capture by the platelets, that would lead to a reduction in
their size; that question would be studied best by TEM, and also by IR spectroscopy (Si(001):H peak).
(7) The compensation effect poses an interesting question. It would be worth finding out if the interstitial mechanism described in Section 4.2.3 does take place in that case, and whether the B–B pairs are
formed or not in samples heavily co-doped with As and B.
Additional or alternate mechanisms have been proposed. One is the catalytic formation of H2 by B
interstitials [101]. It is argued that the B dangling bonds can capture not only free H atoms but also H
from wandering IH2 and VH2 defects (presumably above 200 °C), and later release them as H2. However,

www.pss-a.com © 2007 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim


-----

2164 B. Terreault: Hydrogen blistering of silicon

we have seen that all the B is in the form of B–B pairs devoid of dangling bonds. Finally, the absence of
IR lines due to B–H stretch modes and the compensation effect appear consistent with a direct effect of
the Fermi level on the rate-limiting step [107]. So far, B-doping has been the only means of p-type doping studied. Therefore, modifying the Fermi level without using boron might be a way to settle that question.

4.3 Effect of He ion coimplantation

4.3.1 Threshold dose reduction; synergistic effect of He pressurizing of platelets

He ion implantation does not easily cause Si blistering, a dose on the order of ~2 × 10[17] He/cm[2] is required for that purpose. It was then a surprise when Agarwal et al. [108] discovered that successive implantations (so-called coimplantation) of H and He ions allowed blistering at considerably lower total ion
dose than H ions alone. This type of hydrogen engineering can of course save time and implies no unwanted doping since He is electrically inert. Helium can also be flushed out afterwards at ~800 °C. Figure 35 shows the threshold total ion doses obtained by Agarwal et al. as a function of the H ion fraction.
The optimal H:He ratio is about 1:1, the minimum was obtained with 0.75 × 10[16] H/cm[2] followed by
1 × 10[16] He/cm[2]; this compares to ~4 × 10[16] H/cm[2] for H alone (Section 2.1) at the energy they used,
namely 30 keV for H (and 33 keV for He). Intriguingly, implantation in the reverse order (He first) did
not allow quite as low a total dose. Using 5 keV H and 8 keV He ions, Moutanabbir & Terreault [109]
found that the He ions, rather than the H ions, had to be implanted first to get the lowest blistering
threshold, i.e. 0.2 × 10[16] He/cm[2] followed by 0.6 × 10[16] H/cm[2]. The reverse combination failed to give
blisters for total doses as high as 3 × 10[16] /cm[2].
The confusion about the implantation order for easy blistering was clarified by Lagahé-Blanchard
et al. [110] who compared the kinetics of splitting for coimplantations of He ions of 32, 60 and 145 keV
together with H ions of fixed energy, i.e. 32 keV, in both orders. For 32 keV He, for which the He implant depth is about 2/3 of the H implant depth, the splitting kinetics were faster with H first; for 60 and
145 keV He ions, which are implanted deeper that the H, the reverse was true. Note that the magnitudes
of these effects, whether on the threshold dose or on the kinetics, are relatively modest when H is implanted deeper, but are quite dramatic when He is deeper. The deeper ion must therefore be implanted
first to facilitate blistering: This indicates that if the second implant runs through the first implant, it will
destroy some of the complexes that favour blistering, especially if it is a He ion. For the sake of brevity,
the implantation order with the deeper implant first will be called “DF order” and the other one “DL
order”. An investigation [110] of the splitting kinetics in the DF order showed the following: (i) The
kinetics are independent of the depth of the He implant, in other words He diffusion is not a rate-limiting
factor. (ii) Splitting is faster at higher H and/or He doses, the activation energy varying between 1.8 and
2.5 eV. There is an exception: for a high He dose of 3 × 10[16] He/cm[2], the He should not be implanted too

Fig. 35 Total (H + He) implantation dose necessary for
blistering as a function of the H/(H + He) fraction (from
Agarwal et al. [108], by permission).

© 2007 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim www.pss-a.com


-----

phys. stat. sol. (a) 204, No. 7 (2007) 2165

Fig. 36 (online colour at: www.pss-a.com) Normalized H (a) and He (b) depth distributions in coimplanted Si, asimplanted and after annealing at the indicated temperatures for 1 h. Solid (black) lines: He implanted first; dotted
(pink) lines: H implanted first. In the H profiles the peak at ~ 1.75 MeV is due to surface contamination (from Duo
et al. [113], by permission).

deep because in that case it forms very stable bubbles and fails to diffuse back to the H depth. On the
other hand, if there is too much overlap between the H and He depth distributions, the ion-cut surfaces
are rougher [111].
The He is actually observed to migrate to the H-rich (and platelet-rich) region during annealing, as
shown by Weldon et al. [112] using SIMS and Duo et al. [113] using ERD. The last data are shown in
Fig. 36. When the ions are implanted in the DF order (here H first since the H is deeper), upon annealing
the He peak moves from ~220 nm to ~400 nm to match the H profile. If implanted in the DL order, the
He only succeeds in moving half-way before being retrapped by some defects. The inverse motion of He
from a large depth to a meet a shallow H implant was also observed [112]. Supposing the He to have
been initially located in an interstitial site, it is obvious that its capture by a platelet will result in a large
reduction in the free energy; and if it was trapped in nm-size bubbles, which is normal for He implantation, the driving force for capture by platelets must be a reduction in the strain energy (Eq. (3), Section 3.1.2). Once in the platelets, He is of course a formidable pressurizer since (i) it is not wall-adsorbed
and (ii) it gives twice as much pressure as H2, per atom. When the H and He are deliberately implanted at
the same depth, the He still moves: its profile has been observed to sharpen by a remarkable factor of ~3
to coincide with the peak of the H profile [72].

4.3.2 Defect evolution

Coimplantation can have remarkable effects on the backscattering yield of as-implanted samples, compared with H-only implantation. With H (30 keV) implanted deeper and He (33 keV) shallower, Duo
et al. [113] actually found little effect of implantation order on the RBS/C spectra. On the other hand,
with H (5 keV) shallower and He (8 keV) slightly deeper, Moutanabbir et al. [71] observed very considerable differences. With He first (Fig. 37(a)), the damage level at RT or 200 °C is unmeasurably low
(compare with, e.g., Fig. 13). This shows that the preimplanted He interacts with the “hot” defects produced during the H implantation to form preferentially the type of complexes giving blisters, probably
He containing platelets, and to form less of those defects that cause backscattering. Upon annealing, the
RBS/C yield rises remarkably strongly up to 600 °C. The shuttle motion of the peak (Section 3.3.2) is
also visible, and at 600 °C in particular, the near-surface enhancement due to blisters [72] is clearly pre
www.pss-a.com © 2007 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim


-----

2166 B. Terreault: Hydrogen blistering of silicon


depth [nm]
300 200 100


depth [nm]
300 200 100


20

15


20

15


5

0

H+He

RT
2000C

3000C

4000C

6000C

virgin
random

1,00 1,05 1,10 1,15


5

0

He+H

RT
2000C

3000C

4000C

6000C

virgin
random

1,00 1,05 1,10 1,15


(b)


(a)


backscattered energy [MeV]


backscattered energy [MeV]


Fig. 37 Normalized RBS/C spectra for Si coimplanted with 0.7 × 10[16] H/cm[2] at 5 keV and
0.25 × 10[16] He/cm[2] at 8 keV, as-implanted and after ramp annealing at 0.33 K/s up to the indicated temperatures: (a) In DF order (He first); (b) in DL order (He last). (From Moutanabbir et al. [71].)

sent. When He is implanted last (Fig. 37(b)), the RT damage level is the same for 0.7 × 10[16 ]H/cm[2] as for
2 × 10[16 ]H/cm[2] alone. This indicates that some complexes, probably small vacancy and interstitial clusters, left over from the previous H irradiation, act as nuclei for the capture and stabilization of point defects generated during the subsequent He irradiation: this has the effect of generating larger clusters.
Note that this mechanism is favoured by the fact that the peak in the distribution of He-ion-produced
Frenkel defects is quite close to the peak in the H concentration, where one finds the H-stabilized defects. Contrary to the case of He first, annealing does not produce a very large increase in the peak yield,
and above 400 °C the yield drops to a low value. This scheme proposed for He deeper turns out to be
also consistent with the absence of order effect in the RBS/C spectra when He is shallower [113]. Indeed,
in that case, the DL order is the one in which H ions go through the He implantation profile, but (i) there
are fewer clusters left over from the He irradiation because they are not H-stabilized, and (ii) the passage
of H ions produces much fewer Frenkel defects than He ions. This peculiar synergistic effect is thus not
symmetric at all.
Weldon et al. [112] had remarked that the IRAS spectra for 1 × 10[16] cm[–2] each of He and H were already similar to those for 6 × 10[16] H cm[–2] (Fig. 16, Section 3.4.1), and much more “advanced”, at the
same temperature, than those for the same total dose of 2 × 10[16] H cm[–2] alone (Fig. 18). They also found
that the integrated amount of Si–H bonds did not decrease until 500 °C, instead of 300 °C for H alone.
This is consistent with the higher global gas retention found by thermal desorption spectroscopy [109]:
He alone (at the low dose of 0.25 × 10[16] He/cm[2]) is released at ~200 °C, H alone and He in DL order at
~600 °C, and He in DF order at ~800 °C. For He deeper, Lagahé-Blanchard et al. [110] found in their IR
spectra a profound difference between DF and DL implantation, as shown in Fig. 38. At RT, the basic
difference is that, for the DL order (Fig. 38(b)), the sharp lines have practically all disappeared and in
particular the ones at ~2160, ~2180 and ~2208 cm[–1] (V2H6 and VH4). The spectrum is more typical of
amorphous silicon. Under annealing the spectrum does not evolve rapidly enough towards the elimination of low-k modes and the dominance of strong peaks around 2100–2120 cm[–1 ](internal surfaces) and
2160 cm[–1] (V2H6), and the H is released before any platelet agglomeration can take place. Similar observations were made by Moutanabbir and Terreault [109] using RSS. For H deeper, on the other hand, the
DL order has little effect on the IR spectra [112]. Roughly speaking, the synergistic effect is explained
by He filling of platelets, provided platelets are given a chance to form. We see here in Fig. 38(a) that
indeed the Si(001):H configuration (2100–2120 cm[–1]) is present in abundance at high temperature for
the DF implantation order.
Agarwal et al. [108] remarked that coimplantation in the DF order of a total dose of 2 × 10[16] cm[–2]
produced as many platelets as 6 × 10[16] H cm[–2] alone. Tonini et al. [72] and Duo et al. [114] found these


© 2007 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim www.pss-a.com


-----

phys. stat. sol. (a) 204, No. 7 (2007) 2167

Fig. 38 (online colour at: www.pss-a.com) IRAS spectra of Si–H stretch mode region for Si coimplanted with H
(32 keV) and He (60 keV), as-implanted and after annealing for the indicated times at 425 °C: (a) in “DF order” (He
first); (b) in “DL order” (He last). (From Lagahé-Blanchard et al. [110], by permission.)

platelets to be surrounded by high strain contrast at high temperature, an indication of high pressure. In a
comparative HRTEM study of the implanted layers for H only and for coimplantation in both orders,
Nguyen et al. [111] found a higher density of microcracks for the DF implantation order, consistent with
the ease of blistering. In the DL order, the damage zone was wider and denser and actually amorphous at
higher dose, see Fig. 39. It can be seen that, if the dark regions retain crystalline order, the bright area is
highly disordered. This is further demonstrated by the selected area Fourier transforms shown in the
insets, where the c-Si diffraction pattern appears for the dark region but only diffuse scattering is seen for
the bright area. These TEM observations of the RT damage are totally consistent with the results of

Fig. 39 Bright field HRTEM of Si coimplanted in DL
order with H (30 keV) first and He (70 keV) next. The
insets show selected area Fourier transforms: (top) from a
dark area showing the diffraction pattern of c-Si, and
(middle) from a bright area showing diffuse scattering
from a-Si (from Nguyen et al. [111], by permission).

www.pss-a.com © 2007 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim


-----

2168 B. Terreault: Hydrogen blistering of silicon

RBS/C (Fig. 37) and IRAS (Fig. 38) at RT. From the above observations, Nguyen et al. [111] elaborated
a scenario for the inhibition of blistering in the DL order, compared to the DF order. The formation of
platelets by the pre-implanted H ejects SI’s, which are assumed to gather into small clusters. These
would constitute the nuclei for the capture of the abundant SI’s generated by the subsequent passage of
the He ions, and these enlarged clusters in turn would be the embryos of the amorphous zones. It is well
known that a-Si does not harbour platelets and does not blister. Therefore, platelets can only form
deeper, past the amorphous layer, but necessarily at a higher dose.


4.4 Effect of isotope substitution


We have seen how the physical and chemical interactions between defects and hydrogen determine the
evolution towards blistering. One can hardly modify the H–Si chemistry, but a conceivable way to influence, possibly control, and at least better understand blistering is to change the primary defect production
rate by using deuterons (D) instead of protons. Because of more efficient collisional energy transfer, D
ions indeed produce more than twice as many Frenkel pairs as H ions [28, 29].

4.4.1 Deuterium inhibition of blistering


The higher damage production rate of D ions could naively be expected to lead to better gas retention
(just as He implantation does) and possibly to facilitate blistering. On the contrary, the threshold dose for
D blistering was found by Moutanbbir et al. [3] to be more than twice that for H blistering, at least at the
low energies (2–10 keV) investigated. This giant isotope effect is also present with boron doping [98]
and with He coimplantation [109]. Figure 40 displays the minimum doses for blistering in the different
cases. With n-type or lightly doped p-type Si, the doses are 1.75 × 10[16] H cm[–2], 3.5 × 10[16] D cm[–2], and
2.5 × 10[16] (H + D) cm[-2] for mixed implantation. With He pre-implantation, the minimum total dose is
0.8 × 10[16] (He + H) cm[-2] but at least 3 × 10[16] (He + D) cm[–2]. With 10[–3] Ω cm B-doped Si, the numbers are
1 × 10[16] H cm[–2] and 2 × 10[16] D cm[–2]. At 100 keV, on the other hand, Bedell and Langford [42] report no
significant H/D difference in the blistering thresholds. The main cause of the observed isotope effect is
not “chemical” because the thermodynamics are not strongly affected: the blistering temperature is
~475 °C for H and ~500 °C for D in n-type or undoped Si. The TDS data also display only a small isotope effect, the release temperature is some 40 K higher for D2 than for H2. This ~5 % temperature difference corresponds to a 5% change in activation energy (∆Ea ~ 0.1 eV), consistent with the normal
quantum zero-point energy effect.

4.4.2 Defect evolution


In Fig. 41 [71] is shown a comparison of the backscattering spectra from samples implanted with the
same H and D doses (2 × 10[16] cm[–2]), either after RT implantation, or after annealing at the indicated


Fig. 40 Minimum total ion doses for blistering by 5 keV H
and D and 8 keV He ions under different conditions: H alone,
D alone, H + D, or He + H/D in n-type and low-doped Si; and
in heavily B-doped Si (from Moutanabbir et al. [3, 109] and
Desrosiers et al. [98]).


**D**

**?**

**D**

**H+D**

**D**

**H**

**H**
**H**

**n-type Si** **He+H/D** **B-doped**


© 2007 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim www.pss-a.com


-----

phys. stat. sol. (a) 204, No. 7 (2007) 2169


depth [nm]
300 200 100


depth [nm]
300 200 100


20

15


20

15


5

0

(b) DEUTERIUM

RT
300 0C

400 0C

450 0C

500 0C

virgin
random

1,00 1,05 1,10 1,15


5

0

(a) HYDROGEN

RT
300 0C

400 0C

600 0C

virgin
random

1,00 1,05 1,10 1,15


backscattered energy [MeV]


backscattered energy [MeV]


Fig. 41 4He backscattering spectra of samples implanted with 2 × 1016 H/cm2 (a) or 2 × 1016 D/cm2
(b), as-implanted and after ramp annealing up to the indicated temperatures (from Moutanabbir et al.

[71].

temperatures. We first note that, at RT already, the peak yield for D is not anything like ~2.8 times
higher than the peak yield for H, as would be expected from the defect creation rates at this energy [43],
it is actually slightly lower. This indicates that it is not connected with the self-interstitials but that it is
linked to the H or D atoms, which have comparable peak concentrations, with H having in fact the highest one [43]. The thermal evolution is similar for H and D up to 300 °C but diverges remarkably afterwards. While, for H, the reverse annealing process continues up to 400 °C, for D, it aborts above 300 °C
– and there is no blistering. Both the peak yield and the dechannelling yield decrease above 300 °C for
D. As we saw, the backscattering enhancement (for H) is connected with an increase in strain and with
the transformations in Si–H and H–H bonding taking place at intermediate temperature. The back and
forth motion of the peak is barely present for D; the near-surface enhancement, seen at 30–60 nm at the
highest temperature for H, is absent for D. We recall that the shift in depth at intermediate temperature
appears connected with a move between the damage peak Rd and the concentration peak Rp, while the
shift towards the surface is due to blistering.
In Fig. 42 [115] is presented a comparison between the Raman spectra for samples implanted with H
and D, for six particularly critical temperatures. A considerable difference between the Si–H and Si–D
data is manifest at RT already. This difference therefore arises during the implantation: D atoms somehow interact in a different way than H atoms with the defects that are being continuously created. The D
spectrum is bunched at low k values (multivacancies VnDm, and interstitial defects like ID2). In contrast,
the H spectrum has a balance of low-k and high-k modes; the latter are due to VH4, V2H6 and Si(001):H.
This difference in H vs. D can be understood by comparing the defect production rates during implantation: Since D produces ~2.8 times more vacancies per implanted ion than does H [43], we should expect
to see a higher proportion of saturated vacancies for H than for D.
The differences become even more apparent after annealing. At 300 °C, while, for H, the low-k modes
are strongly attenuated and the high-k modes clearly dominate, for D, the low-k modes are still the
strongest. The higher stability of the VnDm compared to the VnHm suggests that they are made up of larger
clusters. At 400 °C, the V2H6 mode at ~2180 cm[–1] seems to have actually increased. During that time, the
D sample has evolved only moderately. At 470 and 500 °C, blistering is well developed on H-implanted
Si and the H spectrum is entirely dominated by the Si(100):H and the V2H6. The V2D6 have also finally
emerged to some extent but not Si(100):D. At 550 °C, practically all the bound H has disappeared. Since
the H is not all desorbed by far [44], it probably resides in the blisters. Another difference is the striking
persistence of the low-k modes for D; they can only be due to weakly deuterated but particularly large
and stable clusters of vacancies and interstitials. A higher average cluster size is consistent with radiation


www.pss-a.com © 2007 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim


-----

2170 B. Terreault: Hydrogen blistering of silicon

Si-D Raman Shift [cm-1]


1300 1400 1500 1600 1700

4 3


Fig. 42 Si–H (thick lines) and Si–D (thin lines) Raman spectra of
samples implanted with 2 × 10[16 ] H or D cm[–2], as-implanted and after
ramp annealing up to the indicated temperatures (from Moutanabbir
et al. [115]).


1010


10

|Col1|3rd harmonic ID 2 Si-Si V 2D 6 550°C|
|---|---|
||Si(001):H V 2H 6 500°C|
||VH 4 470°C|
||400°C 300°C VH 2 1,2 VH 2 1,2 Si-H|
|Si-D RT||


1800 1900 2000 2100 2200 2300

Si-H Raman Shift [cm-1]


damage theory [28] since the primary defect production rate is higher. Their failure to release their D
may be partly responsible for the absence of blistering.
But the main cause of that absence is probably the lack of high-k complexes at the very beginning, i.e.
after implantation. Positron annihilation data actually suggest that large void volumes do appear around
475 °C in D-implanted samples but soon collapse without giving blisters for lack of sufficient gas pressure [71]. This may be a consequence of the greater rate of vacancy production for D vs. H: the great
number of vacancies leads to void formation, but without sufficient gas available to stabilize them
against annealing, whereas the smaller quantity of voids formed with H, with more gas available per
void, survive to lead to blistering. It was suggested in Section 3.4.3 that, based on the high dose data in
particular (Fig. 19), much of the “background” at high k was made up of imperfect but well hydrogenated platelet-like structures that eventually evolve or coalesce into “real” platelets. Indeed the Raman
spectra for high D doses giving blistering (6 × 10[16] D cm[–2]) show relatively more high-k modes than at
lower dose [81]. The H/D differences are also manifest in the H2/D2 stretch modes: while the 3820 cm[–1]
H2 mode anneals out between 200 and 300 °C, the corresponding 2770 cm[–1] D2 mode only anneals between 300 and 325 °C [71]. This indicates a higher stability of the D-related multivacancy defects, in
agreement with the Si–H/D data.

4.4.3 Discussion


The qualitative resemblance in the evolution, but not in the initial (RT) conditions, between all the Raman spectra – H or D [81], low or high dose [44, 81], with and without boron [98], with or without He

[109] – suggests that eventual blistering is essentially a question of quantity: namely already having after
RT implantation a sufficient amount of platelet-type complexes. A comparative TEM study of platelet
production by H and D ions would constitute a good test of this hypothesis. The absence of significant
isotopic difference in the blistering thresholds at 100 keV makes it imperative that the question be inves
© 2007 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim www.pss-a.com


-----

phys. stat. sol. (a) 204, No. 7 (2007) 2171


Fig. 43 X-ray ω –2θ scans around the 〈004〉 diffraction peak on a MBE-Si/SiGe/Si structure. The inset
shows the depth profile of the perpendicular strain
extracted from the diffraction peak (from Shao et al.

[121], by permission).


10

10


1800

1200

600


10

10


10

10


10-1

Extracted strain vs. depth

Fitting
Raw data

Strain (ppm)

180 190 200

Si Depth (nm)

-2000 -1000 0 1000 2000 3000 4000


ω -2θ (arcsec)

tigated at intermediate energies. If confirmed, a strong dependence on ion energy would imply that the
type of RT-stable defects produced, and their eventual thermal evolution, depend sensitively on the characteristics of the collision cascade.


4.5 Plasma hydrogenation and artificially imposed strain


4.5.1 Trap creation by ion implantation and plasma hydrogenation

Usenko and Ulyashin [5] discovered in 2002 that, if a wafer was first pre-implanted to a definite depth
with a small dose (≤5 × 10[15] cm[–2]) of Ar, He or H, and then hydrogenated at a few hundred degree C
using a plasma at moderate bias (≤2 kV), blistering resulted. The depth of the craters indicated that the
hydrogen was trapped somewhere between the peak in damage and the peak in concentration of the preimplanted ions, depending on dose. The plasma hydrogenation can also be performed at somewhat lower
temperature and followed by a high temperature anneal [116]. The study of the Raman spectra revealed
interesting differences with conventional H ion implantation [116, 117]. After plasma hydrogenation the
low-k modes due to multivacancies are practically absent, the high-k Si–H region is prominent though
devoid of narrow peaks (somewhat like high dose implantation, Fig. 19), and H2, both in multivacancies
(3820 cm[–1]) and gaseous (4160 cm[–1]), is clearly seen. High temperature annealing leaves as usual only
Si(001):H and V2H6. In a slightly different approach Chen et al. [118, 119] carried out a pre-implantation
of boron instead of a gas and used (111) wafers. They showed by ERD that a H dose of 7 × 10[15] cm[–2] was
trapped on the shallow side of the B peak (at ~0.8 Rp). This shows indeed that only really small H doses
are necessary for blistering.


1020


Fig. 44 Comparison between the H depth profiles in plasma
hydrogenated MBE-Si/SiGe/Si structure and virgin Si (from
Shao et al. [121], by permission).


Hydrogenated MBE Si
Hydrogenated virgin Si


200 400 600 800


Si Depth (nm)

www.pss-a.com © 2007 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim


-----

2172 B. Terreault: Hydrogen blistering of silicon


Fig. 45 Comparison between IRAS spectra in plasma hydrogenated MBE-Si/SiGe/Si structure and virgin Si (from Shao
et al. [121], by permission).


MBE Si with buried SiGe layer
Virgin Si (control)

2108

2069 2119
2141

1800 1900 2000 2100 2200 2300

Wavenumber (cm-1)


4.5.2 Strained layer creation and plasma hydrogenation


The already cited work of Kilanov et al. [79] and that of Shao et al. [120] have shown that an interface
such as a boron δ-layer [79], or a c-Si/epi-Si boundary [120], facilitated blistering, when H ions were
subsequently implanted so as to peak at the interface depth. Interfaces create localized strain. In a series
of reports, Shao and co-workers took this idea further. They fabricated a variety of structures by molecular beam epitaxy (MBE), consisting of MBE-Si on strained GeSi on Si [121], or MBE-Si on Sb-doped Si
on Si [122], or MBE-Si on B-doped Si on Si [123]. In all cases, after plasma hydrogenation, H was
trapped at the interface and produced microcracking and blistering or ion-cutting. The physics of the
process will be illustrated by the case of Si/SiGe/Si [121]. The structure used had 190 nm of MBE-Si on
5 nm of SiGe. Figure 43 displays the X-ray measurement of the induced strain; the inset shows the depth
distribution of the perpendicular strain extracted from the diffraction peak: a tensile strain of 0.12% appears on both faces of the SiGe layer. This strain value is definitely less than that obtained by ion implantation (0.3–1%), though its gradient is definitely very strong. When the wafer is exposed at 300–
350 °C to a H plasma, the GeSi layer becomes a trapping center, as shown in Fig. 44. After 3 h of plasma
exposure, the integrated trapped dose measured by ERD is ~10[16] cm[–2]. This is several times less than
required using H implantation, and smaller by a factor of ~2 compared to H implantation combined with
heavy boron doping or He coimplantation. The IRAS spectrum (Fig. 45) comprises only LVM’s due to
H bound on extended internal surfaces (2060–2120 cm[–1]) and a peak around 2141 cm[–1] (presumed to be
VH2, see Table 1). The hydrogen is thus used very efficiently to generate the type of complexes that are
essential for blistering, at the exclusion of low-k defects and even V2H6. In Fig. 46 are shown the XTEM
micrographs of similarly plasma hydrogenated virgin Si (a) and the Si/SiGe/Si stucture (b). While in

Fig. 46 Comparison between XTEM micrographs of plasma hydrogenated virgin Si (a) and MBESi/SiGe/Si structure (b) (from Shao et al. [121], by permission).


© 2007 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim www.pss-a.com


-----

phys. stat. sol. (a) 204, No. 7 (2007) 2173

virgin Si only subsurface damage can be detected, in the Si/SiGe/Si stucture neat microcracking parallel
to the surface has taken place at the depth of the SiGe layer.

5 Models and theories

The theoretical literature directly motivated by the blistering question is not abundant. It is of course a
“messy” problem in which several steps are involved. There is no lack of theoretical work on hydrogen
behaviour in silicon, but it does not frequently apply to blistering because the hydrogen is assumed to be
dilute and/or to have been introduced in a “soft” manner with little or no radiation damage. For completeness sake, this background literature on H in Si will be very briefly recalled. Afterwards, theoretical
and modelling work on different steps in blistering will be reviewed: H-defect interactions during RT
implantation, platelet nucleation, and platelet evolution into blisters.

5.1 Background on hydrogen in silicon

A classic work is the set of first-principles calculations by Van de Walle [60] of the ground state energies
of a number of hydrogen configurations in silicon, including H2 molecules and H bound on the {111}
surface or in some defect sites. His results are summarized in Table 5. The ranking is in general agreement with observations and confirms that vacancies and platelets are the most stable sites for H in irradiated Si. In the absence of defects, only HBC (mobile at RT) and the two forms of H2 can exist. Dopants
such as B and P can also trap H. The values for Si–H on Si {111} are in a way misleading because the
activation barrier to form internal surfaces is not included. Conspicuously absent from our point of view
is H on {100} surfaces: the existence of (001) platelets, only seen after ion implantation, was barely
acknowledged in 1994 because the {111} surface has in principle lower energy. One could also wish to
see performed ab initio calculations of the differences in energy (per H atom) of the various vacancy
complexes VHn (n = 1–4) and V2H6, even if they are presumed to be small; even more ambitious would
be energy calculations for the other relevant defects, multivacancies of various sizes and IH2.
Several years later Jones et al. [21] reviewed the theoretical situation, this time with more emphasis on
interstitial and vacancy defects and especially on the calculation of LVM frequencies for VHn and V2H6.
The calculated values of the mode wavenumbers are greater than the experimental values by 100–
200 cm[–1] in all cases. One pertinent new energy calculation is reported: the dissociation energy of VH2
into V and H2 would be 2 eV/H. Most interestingly, theory confirms the higher stability of V2H6 compared to VH4 (and a fortiori VH3), which was conjectured in Section 3.4.1, based on the annealing behaviour.

Table 5 Calculated values of different configurational energies for H in Si, per H atom, with respect to
free H (adapted from Ref. [60]).

configuration –energy (eV)

neutral H in free space –0

H at BC site –1.05
H*2 –1.65
H2 at Td site –1.92
H–P –2.04
H–B –2.14
Si–H on {111} –2.14
Si–H at isolated dangling bond (d.b.) –2.17
H2 in free space (or blisters) –2.31
Si–H bound in preexisting vacancy –3.15
Si–H at preexisting d.b. –3.55
Si–H on preexisting {111} –3.60

www.pss-a.com © 2007 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim


-----

2174 B. Terreault: Hydrogen blistering of silicon

Fig. 47 (online colour at: www.pss-a.com) Compared H (a) and D (b) implantations at 5 keV in Si, as
simulated by the binary collision code: depth profiles of ions (dashed lines) and generated vacancies (solid
lines); the ion dose is 2 × 1016 cm–2 (from Zahel et al. [125], by permission).

5.2 Dynamic interaction of hydrogen with mobile defects during implantation

We have seen how the evolution of the defect structure under annealing depends on the initial mix of
defects seen for example by IR spectroscopy. The initial RT defects result from (i) the creation of Frenkel pairs by the incident ion, and (ii) the interaction of all these “hot” species (H, V, I) with each other.
Therefore theoretical calculations must treat these two phenomena simultaneously while the species are
hot. The approach adopted by Hobler’s group [124, 125] comprises binary collision simulation of the
collision cascade and kinetic lattice Monte-Carlo (KLMC) simulation of H and defect diffusion and
reactions. The term “lattice” means that atoms diffuse by hops between neighbouring sites in a real Si
lattice. The time between two ion impacts is determined by the actual dose rate in the experiment to be
simulated. The binary collision simulation yields the atomic positions of the implanted ion and the generated point defects, which are added to the defects from previous impacts. During the KLMC simulation
the hot species migrate, form clusters or complexes or recombine. The different parameters such as the
diffusivities are taken from ab initio calculations (e.g. [126, 127]).
Using this code, Zahel et al. [125] simulated the effect of the implantation of 5 keV H or D ions to a
dose of 2 × 10[16] cm[–2]. Figure 47 shows the depth profiles of the H or D ions (dashed lines) and generated
vacancies (solid lines) computed by the binary collision part of the code. We emphasize that these profiles are not those that would be observed following the RT implantation (though they would be at 0 K):
they just indicate the concentrations and locations of these species before they start to migrate and react.
We see that deuterons produce many more vacancies than protons. Now, in Fig. 48 is illustrated the
temporal evolution of the different vacancy defects, as a function of the cumulative dose. (The assumed
current density is 2 µA/cm[2] and the ions are incident along the 〈001〉 axis.) The actual quantities plotted
are the numbers of H or D atoms bound in either mono- or multi-vacancies. First we see that a much
smaller fraction of the generated vacancies survive when D is implanted than when H is. Even more
interestingly, H atoms tend to be trapped in monovacancies whereas D atoms are mostly trapped in multivacancies. This is precisely what is observed experimentally, see Fig. 42. Another interesting point is
that slightly more H atoms than D atoms are bound to vacancies of all types while more D atoms than H
atoms are bound to intersitital defects (not shown). These facts are qualitatively consistent with the Raman spectra. The code also predicts the migration of vacancies towards the maximum in H concentration. There is no magic in these results, H and D have the same diffusion coefficients, binding energies,
etc., it is simply the result of the high number of defects per ion for deuterium, which causes the hot
defects to preferentially react with each other (clustering or annihilating) than with D atoms.
The simulation of platelet formation would constitute the next stage in the development of the code;
this requires first principles information on the structure and configuration energy of platelets or platelet
precursors, and a scenario for their nucleation. There is yet no consensus on these questions but they will

© 2007 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim www.pss-a.com


-----

phys. stat. sol. (a) 204, No. 7 (2007) 2175

3 3 250
3nm 350300 (a) 3nm 200 (b) D in VmDn


250

200

150

100

50


150

100


50

0

(b)
D in VmDn

D in VDn

0,0 0,5 1,0 1,5 2,0

Cumulative Fluence (1016 D cm-2)


(a)

H in VHn

H in VmHn


0,0 0,5 1,0 1,5 2,0

Cumulative Fluence (1016 H cm-2)


Fig. 48 Compared evolutions of vacancy complexes during implantation of 5 keV H (a) and D (b) ions
in Si, as simulated by the full binary collision plus kinetic lattice Monte-Carlo approach. The numbers of
H and D atoms bound to mono- or multi-vacancies are plotted as a function of the cumulative dose (from
Zahel et al. [125], by permission).


be discussed in the next section. In view of the previous considerations (in Sections 3.6, 3.9 and 4.5), it is
doubtful (001) platelets would spontaneously arise: the presence of strain has to be taken into account to
favour nucleation in (001) planes. The fact that the simulation agrees semiquantitatively with experiment
and provides an explanation for the giant isotope effect gives confidence in the validity of the approach.
It is comforting to think that a reliable simulation tool, probably applicable to a host of problems, is
available in order to predict the defect configuration resulting from RT implantation. The approach is in
principle applicable to high temperature annealing but is presently hampered by the paucity of first principles data on the dissociation energies and rates for the various complexes.

5.3 Platelet nucleation mechanisms


Until recently one often referred to the theoretical work on {111} platelets (e.g. [128]) in discussing
(001) platelets. However, it was difficult to see how the nucleation mechanisms proposed for the former
applied to the latter. The many differences between these two types, for example the role of strain and
the totally different behaviour of H2 (appearing under annealing for {111} [129], disappearing [71, 84]
and reappearing [11, 84] for (001)), have led some researchers to put forth specific scenarios and theoretical models for the (001) platelets.

5.3.1 VH4 agregation mechanism


Reboredo et al. [130] proposed a platelet structure and a nucleation scenario based on calculations of
configuration energies using density functional theory. It is assumed that the pre-platelet species present
are the highly stable VH4 and mobile H2. The platelets grow progressively through the reactions:

VH4 + H2 + 2.5 eV → V2H6 + SI, (4)

V2H6 + H2 → VH4©VH4 + 0.1 eV, (5)

VH4©VH4 + H2 + 2.5 eV → VH4©V2H6 + SI, (6)

VH4©V2H6 + H2 → VH4©VH4©VH4 + 0.1 eV, (7)


and so on. Here the symbol “©” means that the hydrogenated vacancies are coordinated in the sense that
they are next-nearest neighbours, as illustrated in Fig. 49. Note that the SI ejection steps of Eqs. (4) and
(6) and higher order ones require an energy input. The calculations showed that: (i) the stablest configu
www.pss-a.com © 2007 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim


-----

2176 B. Terreault: Hydrogen blistering of silicon

Fig. 49 (online colour at: www.pss-a.com) Structure of the n[VH4©]
model of the {001} platelet (large yellow balls = Si, small white balls
= H). On the right is an isolated VH4, on the left a “canted” VH4©VH4
(adapted from Martsinovich et al. [133], with permission.)

rations for large arrays of (nVH4©) are those with all the VH4© in a single {001} plane, and (ii) as the
number of VH4© increases the total energy decreases. So, the nVH4© arrays were proposed as likely
platelet precursors.
An objection to this model is the high activation energy (2.5 eV) required by Eqs. (4), (6), etc. In particular, it is difficult to explain the well attested presence of platelets at RT (Section 3.1.1) in this nucleation scenario. A second difficulty is that H2 is not extremely mobile at RT, having a diffusion coefficient
on the order of 10[–16] cm[2]/s [131], which translates into a diffusion time of 100 s for a distance of 1 nm.
Atomic H is somewhat less sluggish, with a RT diffusion coefficient of 10[–12] cm[2]/s [126], but then two
atoms would be required simultaneously. Finally, the rather early disappearance of VH4 under annealing
while V2H6 remains very strong (Figs. 16, 18, 33, 38, 42) is hard to explain in the scheme implied by
Eqs. (4)–(7) in which, as the nVH4© arrays grow, the VH4 become the dominant vacancy complexes,
unless, possibly, the IR signature becomes that of Si(001):H quite early in the process. All this is very
speculative. One thing is clear however, it is that the ejection of SI’s will result in a compressive stress.

5.3.2 Role of the tensile strain

The facilitating role of the tensile strain has been emphasized earlier in Sections 3.6, 3.9 and 4.5. Lee
et al. [91], following their earlier lines of thought [90], take the tensile strain for “granted” (caused by
some unspecified defects). Upon annealing, the vacancies will regroup in dislocation loops with a gain in
strain energy if the loop Burger’s vector is parallel to the strain. Hydrogen will condense exothermally in
the dislocations, thus giving 2-dimensional hydrogenated cavities. This mechanism depends on a net
influx of vacancies into a narrow layer (where the blisters will appear). This layer being itself at the peak
in damage, the concentration gradient will tend to drive vacancies away. Using measured values of the
strain distribution, Lee et al. [91] calculated that the strain driven flux [(DC/kT) (Y/1–ν) Ω(dε/dx)] could
overcome the concentration gradient flux [–D(dC/dx)]. (In these expressions D and C are the vacancy
diffusion coefficient and concentration, T the absolute temperature, k Boltzmann’s constant, Y, ν and Ω
the Young modulus, Poisson ratio and atomic volume of Si, and ε the strain.) Both fluxes being linear in
D and C, this could be done without knowledge of D and C, therefore only relative values are given. The
necessary flux of H is not modelled either.
Swadener et al. [132] carried out a molecular dynamics study of the effect of strain on vacancy clusters. They compared the formation energies of planar {100} cavities with those of {111} and spherical
cavities, with and without strain. Their most interesting result is shown in Fig. 50. The quantity plotted is
the difference in energy between a {100} cavity and a spherical cavity, with strain present. (The strain
was simulated by applying a 1% in-plane compressive strain and allowing the structure to relax.) It can
be seen that, for cavities with 20 vacancies or less, planar {100} cavities are favoured. Since platelets are
much larger than this (~10[3] vacancies), the authors propose the following scenario for their formation:
(1) Small planar vacancy clusters are formed. (2) Hydrogen diffuses in and satisfies the dangling bonds;
once this is done, the cavities are very stable and there is no more driving force to change to a spherical
shape. In this respect, {100} arrays are favoured over {111} arrays because they have two dangling
bonds per Si atom. (3) The cavities can now grow by Ostwald ripening and/or addition of free vacancies

© 2007 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim www.pss-a.com


-----

phys. stat. sol. (a) 204, No. 7 (2007) 2177

Fig. 50 Differences in total energy of formation between planar {100} and spherical vacancy clusters, and
between planar {111} and spherical vacancy clusters,
under a biaxial compressive stress in the {100} plane
(from Swadener et al. [132], by permission).

together with H atoms. There is possible evidence for these small to medium-size hydrogenated cavities
in the IR spectra (Figs. 16, 18, 33, 38, 42), both in the aptly called multivacancy hump centered on
~2000 cm[–1] and in the “background” at k > 2050 cm[–1] which possibly evolves into Si(001):H. On the
other hand, the KLMC simulations (Section 5.2) do not predict the formation of many clusters larger
than a few vacancies at RT. Taken together, the work of Lee et al. above and the last one offer a possible
low activation energy scenario for platelet nucleation, but the origin of the strain is still nebulous.

5.3.3 Vacancy-less formation of hydrogenated internal surfaces

Martsinovich et al. [133] proposed hydrogen passivated {100} platelet structures that do not require
vacancies or stress for their formation. Using density functional total energy calculations, they were able
to show that several such structures are just as stable as {111} platelets, and deduced the most stable
ones. The reason for their stability is the H passivation whose effect is included in the calculations, contrary to the preceding ones. The basic structures are shown in Fig. 51 and simply consist of Si–H or
Si–H2 decorated {100} planes that are separated by a dilation. What is necessary for their formation is
breaking of Si–Si bonds by H insertion. In implanted material, many broken bonds are already present,
which facilitates the process by minimizing the activation energy. Even more important, calculations
showed that these structures can accommodate H2 molecules exothermally in the interstices, in definite

Fig. 51 (online colour at: www.pss-a.com) Structures of three different hydrogenated Si{001} surfaces:
monohydride (a), symmetric dihydride (b), and canted dihydride (c) (adapted from Martsinovich et al.

[133], by permission).

www.pss-a.com © 2007 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim


-----

2178 B. Terreault: Hydrogen blistering of silicon

Fig. 52 (online colour at: www.pss-a.com) Energies, as a function of dilation, of hydrogenated
Si{001} surfaces having various structures described in the text. The energies per H atom are
referred to that of H2 in the Td site (adapted from
Martsinovich et al. [133], by permission).

configurations that minimize steric hindrance. Finally, the authors also repeated, with a claimed higher
precision, the calculations of Reboredo et al. (Section 5.3.1) of the energies of VH4© agregates. The
ensemble of their results are shown in Fig. 52. First, one can see that, with an optimal dilation of around
0.27 nm, stable structures are obtained; the most stable one is the dihydride with the canted structure
(Fig. 51(c)) which minimizes the steric hindrance between H atoms. Second, H2 molecules can be absorbed in all three structures without destabilizing them. Third, concerning the vacancy models, the new
calculations show that they have energies very similar to those of the optimized vacancy-less structures,
and that a canted structure (not considered by Reboredo et al.) has the lowest energy.
On stability grounds, one then cannot prefer vacancy or vacancy-less models; however the latter have
the great advantage of not requiring the high activation energies implied by Eqs. (4) and (6). The vacancy-less models also face some objections. The TEM studies show no strain contrast around platelets:
is this compatible with the strong dilation? Both types of models also result in platelet thicknesses
≤0.41 nm, compared to a measured value of ~1 nm. An interesting question for future work would be the
calculation of the IR signatures of these structures. In view of the proximity of the two internal surfaces,
how precisely will the Si(001):H IR lines be distorted? How about the Raman signature of H2 trapped in
such thin platelets? These calculations could presumably be carried out by the same approach employed
by Lavrov and Weber [27] in the case of {111} platelets.

5.4 Final step: from platelets to blisters

There are no first principles calculations or simulation works yet on the intermediate steps of Si–H dissociation and reconfiguration, strain build-up, and platelet growth. There have been some attempts [134–
137] at modelling the final steps of crack propagation and surface deformation, beyond Huang’s [39]
Eq. (2) in Section 2.2. These works have identified some relevant physical processes and parameters and
refined oversimplified previous approximations; the most complete is Yang’s paper [137]. Some of the
predictions in these papers disagree with experiment and others are not verifiable because they involve
not directly measurable quantities. When in qualitative agreement with experiment, the calculated trends
were already predicted by simple physical intuition. In truth, the problem is too complex for analytic
calculations. Some of the most obvious oversimplifications are the following. (i) The fraction of the
implanted atoms that actually end up in blisters is not calculated: we know it is relatively small in most
cases. (ii) Modification of the mechanical properties under irradiation is not taken into account. (iii) At
the tip of the crack, molecular dynamics rather than continuum mechanics should be used and include the
effect of hydrogen on Si–Si bonds. (iv) A suitable equation of state for H2 at kilobar pressures has to be
used instead of the ideal gas law, and its equilibrium with H chemisorbed on the walls and in the bulk
modelled (as was done by Cerofolini [61] for He). (v) H2 and/or H detrapping and diffusion has to be
modelled.

© 2007 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim www.pss-a.com


-----

phys. stat. sol. (a) 204, No. 7 (2007) 2179

6 Conclusions

The understanding of hydrogen blistering of silicon has progressed at a steady pace since 1990 and the
last years have seen several scattered informations crystallize into solid science. The threshold dose is
not fundamental because the actual useful gas amount can be as small as a few equivalent monolayers of
H2: all depends on how cleverly the gas is used. The upper dose is not basic either because one can have
blistering, ion-cutting or swelling depending on the boundary conditions. The blister size and morphology indicate that the proto-blisters are nucleated at random points on the surface, from which point they
expand in a roughly circular disc, without long-range interactions between them, until the gas pressure
drives catastrophic microcracking. The phenomenological activation energy appears to be related to the
scission of Si–H bonds but the evidence is not unquestionable: the dose dependence is still not satisfactorily explained.
Let us consider each step in the blistering process in succession.
Implantation step. – The implantations carried out at room or higher temperature and at cryogenic
temperature demonstrate that both the point defects and the implanted H atoms are extremely active
during or after the implantation (depending on the case). An abundance of Si–H complexes and also H2
molecules are formed and, at RT and above, ~10 nm size platelets are already present. A significant part
of this process, i.e. the formation of InHm and VnHm complexes and H2, can now be simulated with reasonable accuracy by kinetic lattice Monte-Carlo computations using only ab initio parameters, and can
thus be considered understood. However, the simulation of platelet nucleation and growth has not been
attempted yet, because only very recently have theoretical calculations of the properties of platelets with
well-defined configurations become available. The implementation of a platelet nucleation scenario in a
KLMC code (or in molecular dynamics?) would be highly valuable and is certainly a challenge.
Also not understood is the origin of the strain and of the displacement field measured by RBS/C,
which is probably related to it. We do know from TEM and IR work the nature of some of the defects
present, and theorists would probably be able to compute their contribution to the strain and the backscattering yield with the present tools. However, the defects corresponding to the “background” in the IR
spectra are not well identified and the defects not related to H even less. Only meticulous and quantitative HRTEM and atom lattice location work using channelling appear possibly capable of giving a description of the configurations of these defects, from which the strain and the displacement field could be
computed. Is this effort worth it? Indeed we do not really know how important the strain is for blistering.
Sound physical arguments tell us that the out-of-plane strain must favour platelet formation. However,
the causal relation is certainly not straightforward since the RBS/C yield at RT is lower in situations that
are highly favourable to blistering like He coimplantation and B doping.
Multivacancy disappearance and the elusive hydrogen. – This step starts somewhere between 250 and
300 °C (or in the first minutes in high temperature isothermal annealing). It may not be essential for
blistering (the RT platelets may already contain enough H); it could be only a sign of what is going on.
Essential or not, multivacancy dissociation is in principle amenable to KLMC calculations, but not
enough of the activation energies and kinetic factors are yet available for that. Worse, we do not know
into what elusive form the liberated H is transformed. The techniques used so far provide no hint on the
nature of the elusive H, therefore it would be worth trying H atom lattice location using axial channelling. Unfortunately, the (001) crystal only allows 〈111〉 and 〈121〉 channelling in the ERD geometry

[138]; alternatively, NRA could be used allowing also 〈001〉 and 〈110〉 channelling. Or else, one could
study the phenomenon by [100], [111] and [110] channelling in (111) crystals. Any argument or calculation that would explain the insensitivity of some particular H configuration to RSS and SIMS would of
course be welcome, and would provide a target for the experimentalists to zero on.
Strain and displacement field buildup. – The coincidence in time or temperature suggests that the
reverse annealing ensues from the H release just described. It may only be a “parasitic” phenomenon, or
the generated strain may be crucial for platelet growth: although He coimplantation and B-doping give
low RT RBS/C yields, they display high yield increases at high temperature. This should be confirmed
by high temperature strain measurements. Understanding the reverse annealing requires identifying the

www.pss-a.com © 2007 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim


-----

2180 B. Terreault: Hydrogen blistering of silicon

precise atomic configuration of damage at that stage, possibly including the elusive H, utilizing again
HRTEM and lattice location techniques; so far, the single high temperature strain measurement only
suggests that it is due to a defect with a relaxation volume of the order of 10 atomic volumes.
Ostwald ripening. – Complete thermodynamic characterization of that step should be an essential
objective because in all probability it is the rate-limiting step. Fortunately, enough phenomenology is
now known so that this step can be studied in isolation: it takes place in a definite time/temperature window while other processes are more or less frozen. In correlation with the strain and RBS/C data, that
information may help in identifying the respective roles of the surface, strain and chemical energies in
driving platelet growth. Unfortunately, it requires painstaking TEM work, but happily again, this technique allows much information about the precise, atomic level platelet geometry to be obtained at the
same time. This can provide focus for the theoretical work: The proposed platelet models could be compared and possibly refined. In addition, it would be highly valuable to try and compute the IR signature
of H2 molecules trapped in such structures.
Microcracking and blistering. – This last step is considered “understood” because it involves almost
only classical macroscopic physics, except for the desorption of H2 in the cavities. However its detailed
simulation must await a good atomic level description of the platelets and the other defects that can alter
the mechanical properties of the substrate.
Let us now consider our understanding of special working conditions.
Crystal orientation effects. – These are understood in terms of the relative tendencies to generate
platelets resulting from (i) surface energy effects, including H passivation, and (ii) the out-of-plane
strain.
High dose effects. – The reasons for the high frequency shift of the IR spectrum, as well as the saturation of the RBS/C yield (and possibly the stress), all without amorphization, are not clear. TEM may
allow testing the hypothesis that imperfect (and difficult to identify) platelet-like structures evolve into
real platelets under annealing.
Implant temperature effects. – Higher temperature implantation does appear to facilitate blistering at
lower dose, by promoting the evolution of the defect structures even more efficiently than annealing, at
least as measured by RBS/C. This approach deserves more practical optimization work and better characterization by IR spectroscopy and other methods.
Boron doping. – An explanation for the facilitation of blistering is proposed in terms of the strain
generated by the peculiar structure of the B interstitial defect in irradiated Si. It accounts for the enhancement in platelet formation, the reduction in RBS/C yield and the activation/non activation effects. It
may also explain the effects of compensation and implantation in reversed order: this is testable using
channelling by verifying whether the B–B split interstitial is formed or not. A direct electronic influence
could be tested by modifying the Fermi level by other means than boron doping.
Helium coimplantation. – Blistering facilitation is understood as due to helium capture by platelets.
The more subtle implantation order effect is also basically elucidated, except for a detailed description of
how deep He post-implantation after shallow H implantation causes amorphization.
Deuterium implantation. – Blistering inhibition is understood through the excessive point defect creation rate which results in larger defect clusters and poorer passivation of the defects.
In all the above cases, comparative strain measurements at room and high temperature are highly
desirable to establish the true role of the strain and confirm the above explanations or hypotheses.

Acknowledgements I would like to acknowledge first my INRS colleagues and students: Nicholas Desrosiers,
Alexandre Giguère, Oussama Moutanabbir, Chao Qian and Guy Ross, and collaborators in other institutions: Martin
Chicoine and François Schiettekatte (Université de Montréal), Peter Simpson (University of Western Ontario),
Gerhard Hobler and Thomas Zahel (Technische Universität Wien). Many people have kindly responded to my precise enquiries and/or shared over the years their insights in sometimes lengthy discussions: Bernard Aspar, Konstantin Bourdelle, Michel Bruel, George Celler, Gianfranco Cerofolini, Yves Chabal, Alain Claverie, Ulrich Gösele,
Tobias Höchbauer, Chrystelle Lagahé, Jung Kun Lee, Natalia Martsinovich, Michael Nastasi, Phuong Nguyen,
Sandrine Rivillon, Lin Shao and particularly Aurélie Tauzin. And I omit several enlightening conference discus
© 2007 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim www.pss-a.com


-----

phys. stat. sol. (a) 204, No. 7 (2007) 2181

sions. I finally thank the numerous authors for their permission to reproduce figures and for kindly forwarding good
quality graphic files for these figures.

References

[1] E. Ligeon and A. Guivarc’h, Radiat. Eff. 27, 129 (1976).
[2] A. Giguère, J. Beerens, and B. Terreault, Nanotechnology 17, 600 (2006).
[3] O. Moutanabbir, A. Giguère, and B. Terreault, Appl. Phys. Lett. 84, 3286 (2004).
[4] M. K. Weldon, V. E. Marsico, Y. J. Chabal, A. Agarwal, D. J. Eaglesham, J. Sapjeta, W. L. Brown, D. C.
Jacobson, Y. Caudano, S. B. Christman, and E. E. Chaban, J. Vac. Sci. Technol. B 15, 1065 (1997).
[5] A. Y. Usenko and A. G. Ulyashin, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 41, 5021 (2002).
[6] U. Gösele and Q.-Y. Tong, Annu. Rev. Mater. Sci. 28, 215 (1998).
[7] A. Giguère and B. Terreault, Surf. Coat. Technol. (in press).
[8] L. Di Cioccio, Y. Letiec, F. Letertre, C. Jaussaud, and M. Bruel, Electron. Lett. 32, 1144 (1996).
[9] I. Radu, I. Szafraniak, R. Sholz, M. Alexe, and U. Gösele, J. Appl. Phys. 94, 7820 (2003).
[10] E. Jalaguier, B. Aspar, S. Pocas, J. F. Michaud, M. Zussy, A. M. Papon, and M. Bruel, Electron. Lett. 34, 408
(1998).
[11] B. Aspar, H. Moriceau, E. Jalaguier, C. Lagahé, A. Soubie, B. Biasse, A. M. Papon, A. Claverie, J. Grisolia,
G. Benassayag, F. Letertre, O. Rayssac, T. Barge, C. Maleville, and B. Ghyselen, J. Electron. Mater. 90, 834
(2001).
[12] F. J. Kub, K. D. Hobart, J. M. Pond, and S. W. Kirchoefer, Electron. Lett. 35, 477 (1999).
[13] L. J. Huang, Q. Y. Tong, and U. Gösele, Electrochem. Solid State Lett. 2, 238 (1999).
[14] S. K. Das and M. Kaminsky, in: Radiation Effects on Solid Surfaces, edited by M. Kaminsky, Advances in
Chemistry Vol. 158 (American Chemical Society, Washington, DC, 1976), p. 112.
[15] B. M. U. Sherzer, in: Sputtering by Particle Bombardment II, edited by R. Behrisch, Topics in Applied Physics, Vol. 52 (Springer, Berlin, 1983), p. 271.
[16] A. Giguère, N. Desrosiers, and B. Terreault, Appl. Phys. Lett. 87, 211911 (2005).
[17] S. Romani and J. H. Evans, Nucl. Instrum. Methods B 44, 313 (1990).
[18] S. J. Pearton, J. W. Corbett, and M. Stavola, Hydrogen in Crystalline Semiconductors (Springer-Verlag,
Heidelberg, 1992).
[19] S. M. Myers, M. I. Baskes, H. K. Birnbaum, J. W. Corbett, G. G. DeLeo, S. K. Estreicher, E. E. Haller,
P. Jena, N. M. Johnson, R. Kirchheim, S. J. Pearton, and M. J. Stavola, Rev. Mod. Phys. 64, 559 (1992).
[20] S. K. Estreicher, Mater. Sci. Eng. R 14, 319 (1995).
[21] R. Jones, B. J. Coomer, J. P. Goss, B. Hourahine, and A. Resende, Solid State Phenom. 71, 173 (2000).
[22] C. Herring, N. M. Johnson, and C. G. Van de Walle, Phys. Rev. B 64, 125209 (2001).
[23] R. E. Pritchard, M. J. Ashwin, J. H. Tucker, and R. C. Newman, Phys. Rev. B 57, R15048 (1998).
[24] N. M. Johnson, F. A. Ponce, R. A. Street, and R. J. Nemanich, Phys. Rev. B 35, 4166 (1987).
[25] J. N. Heyman, J. W. Ager III, E. E. Haller, N. M. Johnson, J. Walker, and C. M. Doland, Phys. Rev. B 45,
13363 (1992).
[26] S. Muto, S. Takeda, and M. Hirata, Philos. Mag. A 72, 1057 (1995).
[27] E. V. Lavrov and J. Weber, Phys. Rev. Lett. 87, 185502 (2001).
[28] M. W. Thompson, Defects and Radiation Damage in Metals (University Press, Cambridge, 1969).
[29] M. Nastasi, J. W. Mayer, and J. K. Hirvonen, Ion-Solid Interactions: Fundamentals and Applications (University Press, Cambridge, 1996).
[30] M. Bruel, Electron. Lett. 31, 1201 (1995).
[31] M. Bruel, Mater. Res. Soc. Bull. 23, 35 (1998).
[32] G. K. Celler and Sorin Cristoloveanu, J. Appl. Phys. 93, 4955 (2003).
[33] G. K. Celler (ed.), Silicon-on-Insulator Technology and Devices XII, ECS Proc., Vol. 2005-03 (The Electrochemical Society, Pennington, NJ, 2005).
[34] Q.-Y. Tong and U. M. Gösele, Adv. Mater. 17, 1409 (1999).
[35] J. B. Boyce and M. Stutzmann, Phys. Rev. Lett. 54, 562 (1985).
[36] Y. J. Chabal and C. K. N. Patel, Phys. Rev. Lett. 53, 210 (1984).
[37] S. Agarwal, B. Hoex, M. C. M. van de Sanden, D. Maroudas, and E. S. Aydil, J. Vac. Sci. Technol. B 22,
2719 (2004).
[38] X. Liu, N. W. Cheung, M. D. Strathman, P. K. Chu, and B. Doyle, Appl. Phys. Lett. 71, 1804 (1997).

www.pss-a.com © 2007 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim


-----

2182 B. Terreault: Hydrogen blistering of silicon

[39] L.-J. Huang, Q.-Y. Tong, Y.-L. Chao, T.-H. Lee, T. Martini, and U. Gösele, Appl. Phys. Lett. 74, 982 (1999).
[40] T. Höchbauer, A. Misra, M. Nastasi, and J. W. Mayer, J. Appl. Phys. 92, 2335 (2002).
[41] B. Aspar, C. Lagahé, H. Moriceau, A. Soubié, M. Bruel, A. J. Auberton-Hervé, T. Barge, and C. Maleville,
Mater. Res. Soc. Symp. Proc. 510, 381 (1998).
[42] S. W. Bedell and W. A. Lanford, J. Appl. Phys. 90, 1138 (2001).
[43] J. F. Ziegler and J. P. Biersack, SRIM-2003 (www.srim.org).
[44] O. Moutanabbir, B. Terreault, M. Chicoine, and F. Schiettekatte, Appl. Phys. A 80, 1455 (2005).
[45] A. Tauzin (CEA-LETI, Grenoble, France), private communication.
[46] O. Moutanabbir, B. Terreault, and G. G. Ross, Appl. Phys. Lett. 82, 4675 (2003).
[47] W. Primak and J. Luthra, J. Appl. Phys. 37, 2287 (1966).
[48] S. K. Das and M. Kaminsky, J. Appl. Phys. 44, 25 (1973).
[49] K. Henttinen, T. Suni, A. Nurmela, I. Suni, S. S. Lau, T. Höchbauer, M. Nastasi, and V.-M. Airaksinen, Nucl.
Instrum. Methods B 190, 761 (2002).
[50] Q.-Y. Tong, K. Gutjahr, S. Höpfe, U. Gösele, and T.-H. Lee, Appl. Phys. Lett. 70, 1390 (1997).
[51] K. K. Bourdelle, Ref. [33], p. 167.
[52] Y. Zheng, S. S. Lau, T. Höchbauer, A. Misra, R. Verda, X.-M. He, M. Nastasi, and J. W. Mayer, J. Appl.
Phys. 89, 2972 (2001).
[53] G. F. Cerofolini, R. Balboni, D. Bisero, F. Corni, S. Frabboni, G. Ottaviani, R. Tonini, R. S. Bruza, A. Zecca,
M. Ceschini, G. Giebel, and L. Pavesi, phys. stat. sol. (a) 150, 539 (1995).
[54] Nicholas Desrosiers and Bernard Terreault, Appl. Phys. Lett. 89, 151922 (2006).
[55] G. F. Cerofolini, L. Meda, R. Balboni, F. Corni, S. Frabboni, G. Ottaviani, R. Tonini, M. Anderle, and
R. Canteri, Phys. Rev. B 46, 2061 (1992).
[56] B. Aspar, M. Bruel, H. Moriceau, C. Maleville, T. Poumeyrol, A. M. Papon, A. Claverie, G. Benassayag,
A. J. Auberon-Hervé, and T. Barge, Microelectron. Eng. 36, 233 (1997).
[57] M. Bruel, Mater. Res. Innovat. 3, 9 (1999).
[58] S. Frabboni, Phys. Rev. B 65, 165436 (2002).
[59] T. Akatsu, K. K. Bourdelle, C. Richtarch, B. Faure, and F. Letertre, Appl. Phys. Lett. 86, 181910 (2005).
[60] C. G. Van de Walle, Phys. Rev. B 49, 4579 (1994).
[61] G. F. Cerofolini, F. Corni, S. Frabboni, C. Nobili, G. Ottaviani, and R. Tonini, Mater. Sci. Eng. 27, 1 (2000).
[62] J. Grisolia, G. Ben Assayag, A. Claverie, B. Aspar, C. Lagahé, and L. Laanab, Appl. Phys. Lett. 76, 852
(2000).
[63] M. Bruel, Nucl. Instrum. Methods B 108, 313 (1996).
[64] J. Weber, T. Fisher, E. Hieckmann, M. Hiller, and E. V. Lavrov, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 17, S2303 (2005).
[65] G. F. Cerofolini, L. Meda, C. Volpones, G. Ottaviani, J. DeFayette, R. Dierckx, D. Donelli, M. Orlandini,
M. Anderle, R. Canteri, C. Claeys, and J. Vanhellemont, Phys. Rev. B 41, 12607 (1990).
[66] T. Höchbauer, A. Misra, M. Nastasi, J. W. Mayer, and W. Ensinger, Nucl. Instrum. Methods B 242, 623
(2006).
[67] T. Höchbauer, A. Misra, M. Nastasi, and J. W. Mayer, J. Appl. Phys. 89, 5980 (2001).
[68] T. Höchbauer, A. Misra, M. Nastasi, K. Henttinen, T. Suni, I. Suni, S. S. Lau, and W. Ensinger, Nucl. Instrum. Methods B 216, 257 (2004).
[69] D. Kovač and G. Hobler, Nucl. Instrum. Methods B 249, 776 (2006).
[70] J. K. Lee, M. Nastasi, N. David Theodore, A. Smalley, T. L. Alford, J. W. Mayer, M. Cai, and S. S. Lau, J.
Appl. Phys. 96, 280 (2004).
[71] O. Moutanabbir, B. Terreault, M. Chicoine, F. Schiettekatte, and P. J. Simpson, Phys. Rev. B 75, 075201
(2007).
[72] R. Tonini, F. Corni, C. Nobili, G. Ottaviani, F. Cazzaniga, and G. Queirolo, Solid State Phenom. 82–84, 291
(2002).
[73] J. D. Holbech, B. Bech Nielsen, R. Jones, P. Stich, and S. Öberg, Phys. Rev. Lett. 71, 875 (1993).
[74] B. Bech Nielsen, L. Hoffmann, and M. Budde, Mater. Sci. Eng. B 36, 259 (1996).
[75] M. Budde, B. Bech Nielsen, P. Leary, J. Goss, R. Jones, P. R. Briddon, S. Öberg, and S. J. Breuer, Phys. Rev.
B 57, 4397 (1998).

[76] Y. J. Chabal, M. K. Weldon, Y. Caudano, B. B. Stefanov, and K. Raghavachari, Physica B 273/274, 152
(1999).
[77] M. Budde, C. Parkes Cheney, G. Lüpke, N. H. Tolk, and L. C. Feldman, Phys. Rev. B 63, 195203 (2001).
[78] E. V. Lavrov, J. Weber, L. Huang, and B. Bech Nielsen, Phys. Rev. B 64, 035204 (2001).

© 2007 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim www.pss-a.com


-----

phys. stat. sol. (a) 204, No. 7 (2007) 2183

[79] D. V. Kilanov, V. P. Popov, L. N. Safranov, A. I. Nikiforov, and R. Sholz, Semiconductors 37, 620 (2003);
translated from Fiz. Tekh. Poluprovodn. 37, 644 (2003).
[80] C. Lagahé, B. Aspar, H. Moriceau, A. Sousbie, and T. Barge, 2001 IEEE Int. SOI Conf. Proc. (IEEE, 2001),
p. 69.
[81] O. Moutanabbir and B. Terreault, J. Chem. Phys. 121, 7973 (2004).
[82] K. Ishioka, M. Kitajima, S. Tateishi, K. Nakanoya, N. Fukata, T. Mori, K. Murakami, and S. Hishita, Phys.
Rev. B 60, 10852 (1999).
[83] T. Mori, K. Otsuka, N. Umehara, K. Ishioka, M. Kitajima, S. Hishita, and K. Murakami, Physica B 302/303,
239 (2001).
[84] W. Düngen, R. Job, Y. Ma, Y. L. Huang, T. Mueller, W. R. Fahrner, L. O. Keller, J. T. Horstmann, and
H. Fiedler, J. Appl. Phys. 100, 034911 (2006).
[85] S. Personnic, A. Tauzin, K. K. Bourdelle, F. Letertre, N. Kernevez, F. Laugier, N. Cherkashin, A. Claverie,
and R. Fortunier, Paper O601, 16th Int. Conf. on Ion Implantation Technology, AIP Conf. Proc., Vol. 866
(AIP, 2006), p. 65.
[86] A. W. R. Leitch, V. Alex, and J. Weber, Phys. Rev. Lett. 81, 421 (1998).
[87] M. Hakala, M. J. Puska, and R. M. Nieminen, Phys. Rev. B 57, 7621 (1998).
[88] R. S. Brusa, M. Duarte Naia, A. Zecca, C. Nobili, G. Ottaviani, R. Tonini, and A. Dupasquier, Phys. Rev. B
49, 7271 (1994).
[89] M. Fujinami, R. Suzuki, T. Ohdaira, and T. Mikado, Phys. Rev. B 58, 12559 (1998).
[90] M. Nastasi, T. Höchbauer, J.-K. Lee, J. P. Hirth, M. Ridgway, and T. Lafford, Appl. Phys. Lett. 86, 154102
(2005).
[91] J.-K. Lee, Y. Lin, Q. X. Jia, T. Höchbauer, H. S. Jung, L. Shao, A. Misra, and M. Nastasi, Appl. Phys. Lett.
89, 101901 (2006).
[92] N. Sousbie, L. Capello, J. Eymery, F. Rieutord, and C. Lagahé, J. Appl. Phys. 99, 103509 (2006).
[93] A. L. Bement, Jr., R. G. Hoagland, and F. A. Smith, Jr., in Fracture: An Advanced Treatise, edited by H. Liebowitz, Vol. III (Academic, New York, 1971), p. 536.
[94] Y. Ma, Y. L. Huang, R. Job, and W. T. Fahrner, Phys. Rev. B 71, 045206 (2005).
[95] Q.-Y. Tong, T.-H. Lee, L.-J. Huang, Y. L. Chao, and U. Gösele, Electron. Lett. 34, 407 (1998).
[96] O. W. Holland, D. K. Thomas, and R. B. Gregory, Mater. Res. Soc. Symp. Proc. 647, O6.1 (2000).
[97] Q.-Y. Tong, R. Scholz, U. Gösele, T.-H. Lee, L.-J. Huang, Y.-L. Chao, and T. Y. Tan, Appl. Phys. Lett. 72,
49 (1998).
[98] N. Desrosiers, A. Giguère, O. Moutanabbir, and B. Terreault, Appl. Phys. Lett. 87, 231908 (2005).
[99] A. Nurmela, K. Henttinen, T. Suni, A. Tolkki, and I. Suni, Nucl. Instrum. Methods B 219/220, 747 (2004).

[100] T. Höchbauer, K. C. Walter, R. B. Schwartz, M. Nastasi, R. W. Bower, and W. Ensinger, J. Appl. Phys. 86,
4176 (1999).

[101] V. P. Popov, V. F. Stas, and I. V. Antonova, Mater. Res. Soc. Symp. Proc. 540, 109 (1999).

[102] J. K. Lee, T. Höchbauer, R. D. Averitt, and M. Nastasi, Appl. Phys. Lett. 83, 3042 (2003).

[103] J. K. Lee, T. Höchbauer, R. D. Averitt, and M. Nastasi, Nucl. Instrum. Methods B 219/220, 662 (2006).

[104] M. Stutzmann, Phys. Rev. B 35, 5921 (1987).
C. P. Herrero, M. Stutzmann, and A. Breitschwerdt, Phys. Rev. B 43, 1555 (1991).

[105] A. M. Piro, L. Romano, S. Mirabella, and M. G. Grimaldi, Appl. Phys. Lett. 86, 081906 (2005).

[106] L. Romano, A. M. Piro, S. Mirabella, M. G. Grimaldi, and E. Rimini, Appl. Phys. Lett. 87, 201905 (2005).

[107] U. Gösele (MPI, Halle, Germany), private communication.

[108] Aditya Agarwal, T. E. Haynes, V. C. Venezia, O. W. Holland, and D. J. Eaglesham, Appl. Phys. Lett. 72,
1086 (1998).

[109] O. Moutanabbir and B. Terreault, Appl. Phys. Lett. 86, 051906 (2005).

[110] C. Lagahé-Blanchard, N. Sousbie, S. Sartori, H. Moriceau, A. Sousbie, B. Aspar, P. Nguyen, and B. Blondeau, ECS Proc. 2003-19, 346 (2003).

[111] Phuong Nguyen, I. Cayrefourcq, K. K. Bourdelle, A. Boussagol, E. Guiot, N. Ben Mohammed, N. Sousbie,
and T. Akatsu, J. Appl. Phys. 97, 083527 (2005).
Phuong Nguyen, K. K. Bourdelle, T. Maurice, N. Sousbie, A. Boussagol, X. Hebras, L. Portigliatti, and
F. Letertre, J. Appl. Phys. 101, 033506 (2007).

[112] M. K. Weldon, M. Collot, Y. J. Chabal, V. C. Venezia, A. Agarwal, T. E. Haynes, D. J. Eaglesham, S. B.
Christman, and E. E. Chaban, Appl. Phys. Lett. 73, 3721 (1998).

[113] Xinzhong Duo, Weili Liu, Miao Zhang, Lianwei Wang, Chenglu Lin, M. Okuyama, M. Noda, Wing-Yiu
Cheung, Paul K. Chu, Peigang Hu, S. X. Wang, and L. M. Wang, J. Phys. D, Appl. Phys. 34, 477 (2001).

www.pss-a.com © 2007 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim


-----

2184 B. Terreault: Hydrogen blistering of silicon

[114] Xinzhong Duo, Weili Liu, Miao Zhang, Lianwei Wang, Chenglu Lin, M. Okuyama, M. Noda, Wing-Yiu
Cheung, S. P. Wong, Paul K. Chu, S. X. Wang, and L. M. Wang, J. Appl. Phys. 90, 3780 (2001).

[115] O. Moutanabbir, B. Terreault, M. Chicoine, P. J. Simpson, T. Zahel, and G. Hobler, Physica B 376/377, 36
(2006).

[116] R. Job, W. Düngen, Y. Ma, Y. L. Huang, and J. T. Horstmann, Mater. Res. Soc. Symp. Proc. 864, E10.2.1
(2005).

[117] Y. Ma, R. Job, W. Düngen, Y. L. Huang, W. R. Farmer, M.-F. Beaufort, S. Rousselet, and J. T. Horstmann,
Appl. Phys. Lett. 86, 252109 (2005).

[118] Peng Chen, Paul K. Chu, T. Höchbauer, J.-K. Lee, M. Nastasi, D. Buca, S. Mantl, R. Loo, M. Caymax,
T. Alford, J. W. Mayer, N. Davis Theodore, M. Cai, B. Schmidt, and S. S. Lau, Appl. Phys. Lett. 86, 031904
(2005).

[119] Peng Chen, S. S. Lau, Paul K. Chu, K. Henttinien, T. Suni, I. Suni, N. David Theodore, T. L. Alford, J. W.
Mayer, Lin Shao, and M. Nastasi, Appl. Phys. Lett. 87, 111910 (2005).

[120] Lin Shao, J. K. Lee, T. Höchbauer, M. Nastasi, Phillip E. Thompson, I. Rukasova, H. W. Seo, Q. Y. Chen,
J. R. Liu, and Wie-Kan Chu, Nucl. Instrum. Methods B 242, 509 (2006).

[121] Lin Shao, Yuan Li, J. K. Lee, Q. X. Lia, Yongqiang Wang, M. Nastasi, Phillip E. Thompson, N. David Theodore, Paul K. Chu, T. L. Alford, J. W. Mayer, Peng Chen, and S. S. Lau, Appl. Phys. Lett. 87, 091902 (2005).

[122] Lin Shao, Yuan Lin, J. G. Swadener, J. K. Lee, Q. X. Jia, Y. Q. Wang, M. Nastasi, Phillip E. Thompson,
N. David Theodore, T. L. Alford, J. W. Mayer, Peng Chen, and S. S. Lau, Appl. Phys. Lett. 87, 251907
(2005).

[123] Lin Shao, Yuan Lin, J. G. Swadener, J. K. Lee, Q. X. Jia, Y. Q. Wang, M. Nastasi, Phillip E. Thompson,
N. David Theodore, T. L. Alford, J. W. Mayer, Peng Chen, and S. S. Lau, Appl. Phys. Lett. 88, 021901
(2006).

[124] G. Hobler and G. Otto, Mater. Sci. Semicond. Process. 6, 1 (2003).

[125] T. Zahel, G. Otto, and G. Hobler, Ref. [33], p. 179.

[126] S. Bédard and L. J. Lewis, Phys. Rev. B 61, 9895 (2000).

[127] S. Libertino, S. Coffa, A. La Magna, and V. Privitera, Nucl. Instrum. Methods B 178, 25 (2001).

[128] S. B. Zhang and W. B. Jackson, Phys. Rev. B 43, 12142 (1991).

[129] A. W. R. Leitch, V. Alex, and J. Weber, Solid State Commun. 105, 215 (1998).

[130] F. A. Reboredo, M. Ferconi, and S. T. Pantelides, Phys. Rev. Lett. 82, 4870 (1999).

[131] V. P. Markevich and M. Suezawa, J. Appl. Phys. 83, 2988 (1998).

[132] J. G. Swadener, M. I. Baskes, and M. Nastasi, Phys. Rev. B 72, 201202 (2005).

[133] N. Martsinovich, I. Suarez Martinez, and M. Heggie, phys. stat. sol. (c) 2, 1771 (2005).

[134] L. B. Freund, Appl. Phys. Lett. 70, 3519 (1997).

[135] C. M. Varma, Appl. Phys. Lett. 71, 3519 (1997).

[136] W. Han and J. Yu, J. Appl. Phys. 89, 6551 (2001).

[137] F. Yang, J. Appl. Phys. 94, 1454 (2003).

[138] Lin Shao, Y. Q. Wang, M. Nastasi, and J. W. Mayer, Nucl. Instrum. Methods B 249, 230 (2006).

After a Ph.D. and a few years of research in elementary particle physics,
the author joined in 1972 the Institut national de la recherche scientifique
(INRS) – Énergie in Québec, Canada, an institute devoted to energyrelated research and graduate teaching. He first focussed on basic studies
of the processes involved in plasma–surface interactions, relevant to
thermonuclear fusion research, and particularly on helium blistering of
metals. In the 1980s and 1990s, he was group leader for plasma–wall
interactions, materials, and nuclear studies within the Centre Canadien de
Fusion Magnétique (CCFM) consortium operating the Tokamak de
Varennes (TdeV). After the demise of the Canadian Fusion Program, he
turned to plasma and ion beam processing of materials, and most recently
to the study of ion blistering as applied to microelectronic and photonic
device fabrication. He is now an Honorary retired Professor at INRS.

© 2007 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim www.pss-a.com


-----

